
Henryk Berlewi (1894 Warsaw  1967 Paris)
The Polish painter, graphic designer and art critic Henryk Berlewi was one
of the outstanding figures of POLISH CONSTRUCTIVISM and the YIDDISH AVANT-
GARDE. As a theoretician and innovator of functional typography he became a
precursor of Op Art and Minimal Art.

Career
Berlewi began his artistic education at the Warsaw School of Fine Arts in
1904 and continued it at the Academy of Fine Arts in Antwerp (1909-10), the
cole des Beaux Arts and the cole des Arts Dcoratifs in Paris (1911-12).
In 1913 he attended the Warsaw School of Design and in 1918-22 he
collaborated with the Warsaw circles of the Futuro-Dadaists and the Yiddish
avant-garde. As a co-organiser of exhibitions and theatre performances, a
designer of posters, books and artistic magazines, he became an outstanding
figure of the so-called Jewish expressionism.

In 1921, at the Warsaw settlement of the Kultur-Lige, Berlewi met El
Lissitzky, who stimulated his involvement in international abstract art.
His interest in SUPREMATISM and Constructivism intensified in 1922-23 in
Berlin, where he was in close contact with Theo van Doesburg, Viking
Eggeling, Lszl Moholy-Nagy, Hans Richter and Mies van der Rohe. Berlewi
joined the Novembergruppe and participated in the Great Berlin Art
Exhibitions in 1922 and 1923 and the 1922 Congress of the International
Union of Progressive Artists in Dsseldorf, where he met Stanisaw Kubicki
and Jankiel Adler.
In 1923 he returned to Warsaw and began to help integrating Polish and
Jewish artistic circles. In 1924 he became a member of the Blok group but,
competing with its co-founders, he organised his own individual exhibition
a day before its first collaborative show. His manifesto of Mechano-
Facture was published in Warsaw in May 1924 and appeared in Herwarth
Waldens Der Sturm journal in September along with a display of his works
devoted to this concept.

Mechano-Facture promoted pictorial two-dimensionality; it meant to use
mechanical means in order to create texture and reject the illusion of
three-dimensional space. The reduction of colours to black, white and red,
and visual equivalents to geometrical shapes such as circles, squares and
raster factures aimed at creating rhythmical arrangements, reflecting the
spirit of modernity. Berlewi also applied his theory to commercial art,
using it in the product design of this advertising agency Mechano-Reklama
(Mechano Advertising), which he had founded together with Aleksander Wat.

In 1927 Berlewi settled in Paris; he travelled through Belgium in 1928-
1938, producing portraits of political leaders and literary representatives
and pictures of nudes with strong contours defining visual forms. In 1942
he found refuge in Nice and participated in the activities of the French
resistance in 1943-44. In 1947 he turned to the reintroduction of the
object and began painting still lifes inspired by the masters of the 17th
century.

Legacy
The Berlewi exhibitions at the Denise Ren and Creuse galleries in Paris in
1957 initiated the reception of the work of this pioneer of abstract art in
Poland and his mechano-facture experiments. They were followed by numerous
exhibitions in Paris, Warsaw, Zurich (1950-67) and various places in
Germany and Poland (1961-67), among others the shows Der Sturm in Berlin
(1961) and Responsive Eye in New York (1965). In consequence, Berlewi, who
was also a founder of the Archives de lArt Abstrait de L Avant-Garde
Internationale (1960) and a member of the Syndicate de la Presse Artistique
Francaie and the Association Internationale des Critiques dArt, further
strengthened his position in the art scene of the 1960s and his reputation
as a precursor of abstract and kinetic art.

References and further readings:

Magdalena Frankowska/Artur Frankowski, Berlewi, Gdask: Terytoria, 2009.

Eckhard Neumann, Henryk Berlewi and Mechano-faktura, Typographica 9 (June
1964): 21-28.

Nadine Nieszawer, Marie Boy, Paul Fogel, Peintres Juifs  Paris 1905-1939
Ecole de Paris, Paris: Editons Denoel, 2000.

Andrzej K. Olszewski, Henryk Berlewi, Warszawa: Wydawnictwo Artystyczno-
Graficzne, 1968.

Piotr Rudziski, Awangardowa twrczo Henryka Berlewiego, Biuletyn
Historii Sztuki, 39/2/1977 and 39/4/1977, pp. 205-219, 376-387.
Seth L. Wolitz, Some Comments on David Mazowers article on Henryk Berlewi,
The Mendele Review: Yiddish Literature and Language 158 (2005), n.p.


Suggested images:

    1. Henryk Berlewi, Khonon and Lea, image for Dybbuk by An-Ski, 1921,
       lithography, Jewish Historical Institute, Warsaw
       http://www.flickr.com/photos/ceno4/4604115983/


    2. Henryk Berlewi, Circle and square in the space, (Mechano Facture in
       Black and Blue), guache, Indian ink, pencil1923, National Museum of
       Warsaw.

                            http://malalitera.wordpress.com/2010/07/06/henryk
                            -berlewi


    3. Photograph by Edward Hartwig showing Henryk Berlewi and his neo-
       mechano-factures accompanied by Models in Hotel Europe, Warsaw,
       1960s, Copyright and Courtesy Gaiser & Cie.
       http://henrykberlewiarchive.blogspot.com/2009/11/welcome-to-henryk-
       berlewi-archive.html


