
Brazilian Modernism

The opening of Braslia on April 21, 1960 represented the culmination of
Brazils modernist and nationalist projects whose mission was to open and
unify the vast country while promoting its language, culture and
individuality. Braslia assured that the countrys public and political
image would continue to be closely associated with the artistic and social
ideals of international modernism as expressed by its most prominent
architects, artists, authors, and intellectuals. The citys architects,
Oscar Niemeyer (1907-2012) and Lcio Costa (1902-1998), worked closely with
Le Corbusier (1887-1965) during his visits to Brazil from 1929-1936. The
Russian migr architect Gregori Warchavchik (1896-1972) designed the first
modernist house in So Paulos Vila Mariana; it was completed in 1928.
The interplay and symbiosis of local realities with European sources and
contacts was an essential component of modernism. The international avant-
garde provided an artistic form for innovative expression of national
folklore, popular culture and arts. Brazilian artists often assimilated the
discoveries of earlier explorers and researchers such as Jos Vieira Couto
de Magalhes (1837-1898), Slvio Romero (1851-1914), Marechal Cndido
Rondon (1865-1958), Edgar Roquette-Pinto (1884-1954), and Lus da Cmara
Cascudo (1898-1986), among others, who had assiduously collected folklore,
myths, music, and legends throughout the Brazilian interior. The fusions of
these materials with European forms produced the vital hybrid expressions
considered innovative and authentically Brazilian. Modernism took on the
force of a movement in Brazil after the February 1922 Modern Art Week in
So Paulo, while at the service of what the movements leader in So Paulo,
Mrio de Andrade (1893-1945), called national creative consciousness. Its
major figures sought a prominent and recognizably Brazilian place in
international modernism; and secondarily through local works of folkloric,
linguistic, or regional expression to construct a modern national culture.

The international dimensions of modernism were essential for the
development of an extraordinary array of young Brazilian artists and
writers.  Painter Anita Malfatti (1889-1964) studied in Berlin in 1912 and
absorbed the colors of German Expressionism, moving in 1915 to New Yorks
Independent School of Art before her first controversial exhibit in So
Paulo in December 1917.  The artist Tarsila do Amaral (1886-1973), whose
works draw increasing attention today, studied at the Academie Julien in
1920 and resided in Paris for much of the following decade, studying with
Fernand Lger (1881-1955), Andr Lhote (1885-1962), and Albert Gleizes
(1881-1953). The Galerie Percier exhibited her works in 1926.  Her painting
A Negra (1923) launched her most productive phase of geometrical and
primitivist canvasses conveying folkloric and indigenous colors and
concepts, leading to her most famous work, the Abaporu or man who eats
(1928). The Italian-Brazilian sculptor Victor Brecheret (1894-1955) studied
in Rome from 1913-1919. In 1920 received a commission for the massive
Monumento s Bandeiras located in Parque Ibirapuera.  Lithuanian artist
Lasar Segall (1891-1957) first visited So Paulo in 1913, where he later
became a prominent figure in plastic arts. Pernambucan painter Vicente do
Rego Monteiro (1899-1970) was an influential artist who studied at the
Acadmie Julien and exhibited at the 1913 Salon des Indpendants; his work
with Diaghilev and the Ballets Russes continued in Brazil with drawings
based on prima ballerina Anna Pavlova (1881-1931) and the 1921 ballet
Crenas e Talisms dos ndios do Amazonas produced in Rio de Janeiro. After
two solo exhibitions in Paris in 1925 and 1928, he participated in the
first exhibition of Latin American artists organized by Torres-Garca
(1930). Along with Go-Charles (Charles Guyot, 1892-1963), he took a major
international art exhibition to Recife, So Paulo, and Rio de Janeiro.  The
painter, poet, essayist, and art critic Srgio Milliet (1898-1966) was
educated in Switzerland from 1912-1920, returning to So Paulo where he
participated in the Modern Art Week.  He was in Paris from 1923-25
translating Brazilian poetry for the journal Lumire and with fellow
painter Emlio Di Cavalcanti (1897-1976) getting acquainted with artists
and intellectuals including Picasso, Satie, Lger, Matisse, and Cocteau.
Painter, ecologist, and landscape designer Roberto Burle-Marx (1909-1994)
discovered Brazils native flora at the Botanical Gardens in Berlin while
studying painting in the 1920s. Returning to Brazil in 1930 he began
collecting plants and completed his first garden design in 1933, later
working with architects Niemeyer and Costa. His large botanical estate at
Guaratiba became a national monument in 1985.

In the area of literature, Ronald de Carvalho (1893-1935) participated in
the journal ORPHEU in Lisbon in 1915, which debuted Fernando Pessoa (1888-
1935) as well as other major figures of Portuguese futurism. Eight poems
from Ronalds Epigramas irnicos e sentimentais (1922) served as lyrics for
a composition for voice and orchestra (1921-23) by Heitor Villa-Lobos (1887-
1959), who would achieve a distinguished international reputation. Writer
Oswald de Andrade (1890-1954) traveled to Europe in 1912, a formative
experience that marked his fiction as well as his biography. He was
fascinated by dancer Isadora Duncan (1877-1927) after seeing her performa
in Rio de Janeiro in 1916. Visitors to de Andrades So Paulo garonnire
produced the rich and provocative album O Perfeito Cozinheiro das Almas
Deste Mundo (1918-19), which is considered to be one of the most unusual
documents of the period.  Oswald returned to Europe with Tarsila in 1923
and the couple, coined Tarsilwald by Mrio de Andrade, entertained
principal figures of the European avant-garde. The Swiss-French poet Blaise
Cendrars (1887-1961) joined them in Brazil in March 1924 for an excursion
to explore the baroque heritage of Minas Gerais, and in 1925 Oswald
dedicated his Pau Brasil poems to Cendrars. The two manifestos by Oswald,
Manifesto da Poesia Pau Brasil (1924) and Manifesto Antropfago (1928)
depict a possible intellectual program for the movement in a highly
synthetic form.

In music, French composer Darius Milhaud (1892-1974), who was in Rio de
Janeiro from 1917-1919, composed the twelve dances of Saudades do Brasil
(1920) and Le boeuf sur le toit, popularizing melodies by Brazilian popular
composers. He brought the brilliant young Carioca pianist Maria Virginia
(Nininha) Velloso Guerra (1895-1921) to Paris, with her husband, composer
Oswaldo Guerra (1892-1980). The popular music ensemble Oito Batutas with
the inimitable Pixinguinha (1897-1973), which was performed in Paris for
six months in 1922 at the Shhrazade Club, and financed by patron Arnaldo
Guinle (1884-1963). Pianist Arthur Rubenstein was in Rio de Janeiro in
1918, where he met Milhaud and Villa-Lobos. By 1921 Villa-Lobos had begun
his Rudepoema, a complex rhapsody for piano dedicated to Rubenstein, one
of the most challenging of his compositions, and an important early
expression of the theme of Brazilian savagery. Rubenstein premiered
Villas compositions in Paris in 1924 and 1927.  After his 1927 concert in
Paris, Villa-Lobos was called the cannibal composer because of his use of
rhythm and the way that he incorporated Brazilian percussion instruments
into the orchestra. After 1945 he gained international recognition as one
of the major figures of world music.

As early intellectual leader of the movement, Mrio de Andrade read poems
from his Pauliceia Desvairada (1922) at the Modern Art Week.  He acted
knowledgeably in multiple fields -- from musicology, folklore, poetry, and
dance to history and criticism  and his voluminous correspondence amounts
to a personal memoir of the modernist program. Although he rarely left So
Paulo, Mrio collected a substantial library and closely followed European
literature and arts.  His virtuoso Pan-American folk fantasy, Macunama
(1928), relied on an 1911-13 ethnography from the Orinoco by German
anthropologist Theodor Koch-Grnberg (1872-1924), as well as popular myths
and adages.

The history of Brazilian modernism began only some three decades after the
Modern Art Week with art historian Mrio Pedrosas (1900-1981) appraisal in
1952, Sobre a Semana de Arte Moderna (Dimenses da Arte. Rio de Janeiro:
MEC, 1964, pp. 127-142), although personal accounts by authors Mrio de
Andrade and Oswald de Andrade had appeared in the 1940s. In 1958 Mrio da
Silva Brito (1916 --) published the first and only volume of a planned
history of the movement, opening the way for innumerable studies of its
main figures, journals, and themes. The institutionalization of modernism
in contemporary Brazilian history is indicated by the official theme of
anthropophagy adopted for the twenty-fourth Biennial Art exposition in So
Paulo (1998), as well as the international exposition in Valencia, Spain,
Brazil 1920-1950: de la antropofagia a Braslia (2000-01).



References and Further Reading

Batista, Marta Rossetti, Tel Porto Ancona Lopez & Yone Soares de Lima.
(1972) Brasil  1o Tempo Modernista: 1917-1929. Documentao.  So Paulo:
Instituto de Estudos Brasileiros.

Jackson, Kenneth David. (1998) A Vanguarda Literria no Brasil:
Bibliografia e Antologia Crtica, Frankfurt am Main: Vervuert, Madrid:
Iberoamericana.

Placer, Xavier. (1972) Modernismo Brasileiro: Bibliografia (1918-1971). Rio
de Janeiro: Diviso de Publicaes e Divulgao. Biblioteca Nacional.

Schwartz, Jorge (org.). (2002) Da Antropofagia a Braslia: Brasil 1920-
1950, So Paulo: FAAP, Cosac & Naify.

Schwartz, Jorge. (1995) Vanguardas Latino-Americanas. So Paulo:
Iluminuras; Edusp.

XXIV Bienal de So Paulo: ncleo histrico: antropofagia e histrias de
canibalismos. V. 1.  (1998) Paulo Herkenhoff, Adriano Pedrosa curadores.
So Paulo: A Fundao.
