
David Burliuk (1882 Semirotovshchina, near Kharkiv, Ukraine  1967
Southampton, New York)

Burliuk was a painter, writer, poet, performance artist, journal editor,
and publisher, whose activism and leadership situated him as a primary
avant-garde figure, particularly in his native Ukraine and Russia. His open
and often impetuous stance against the stifling official peredvizhnik
[Russian Realist] ideology, and progressive political and artistic views
earned him the title father of Futurism. His larger outlook towards
lifes improvement was informed by a desire to reform the tsarist
autocracy, bureaucratic inefficiency, persecution and censorship in the
Russian Empire.

Burliuk studied art in Kazan and Odessa between 1898 and 1901. He then
traveled to Munich, where he studied with Wilhelm Diez at the Munich Art
Academy in 1902 followed by Anton Azbe at his private school in 1903. In
1904, he studied at Fernand Cormons Academy in Paris. He returned to
Ukraine, interested in the work of the impressionists and post-
impressionists. He participated in the 17th and 18th exhibitions of the
Association of South Russian [a term for Ukrainian during the Russian
Empire] Artists in Odessa in 1906 and 1907. In 1907, Burliuks family moved
to Chernianka in Southern Ukraine near Kherson, at the mouth of the Dnipro
River. It became a meeting place for Burliuks artist and literary friends
and a site of inspiration for his work. He later gave the group the title
Hylaea, (1912) from the name the ancient Greeks gave for that area when
it was inhabited by the Scyths. The group included Velimir Khlebnikov,
Alexei Kruchenykh, Vladimir Mayakovsky and Benedikt Livshits.

Burliuk himself moved to Moscow in 1907, where a robust art community,
international art exhibitions  particularly from Western Europe  provided
a rich environment in which to work. There, he organized and participated
in a number of exhibitions, several of them with his brother Volodymyr,
also an artist. These included the exhibition Wreath-Stefanos in Moscow,
1907; Link in Kyiv, 1908 featuring his Symbolist Blue Rose group with
Alexandra Exter, Natalya Goncharova, Mikhail Larionov; Knave of Diamonds
Moscow, 1910; Exhibition of Painting 1915. He participated in Vladimir
Isdebskys second salon in Odessa in 1911, contributed the essay The
Savages of Russia to Der Blaue Reiter Almanach (1912) and exhibited with
Der Blaue Reiter in 1911-12 in Munich, with neo-primitivist works. From
1910 to 1913, he studied at the Moscow College of Painting, Sculpture and
Architecture where he met the poet Vladimir Mayakovsky. Their publication
of A Slap in the Face of Public Taste (1912), a manifesto for futurism in
the Russian Empire and traditional arts end, resulted in their expulsion.

Burliuk contributed to futurist booklets, Roaring Parnassus (1913),
Anthology of the Only Futurists in the World (1914), Balding Tale (1918) as
well as others. Under the editorship of Vasilii Kamensky, he and the
Russian futurists published the literary journal Futuristy (1914) surviving
censorship for only two issues. At the height of their reputations, Burliuk
and the futurists embarked on a performance tour of 17 cities in the
Russian Empire, beginning in December 1913 until April 1914. He, his
brother Volodymyr, Mayakovsky, and Kamensky, lectured and conducted poetry
readings on their new movement to widely receptive audiences. A number of
these were rather scandalous events, including stagings of them drinking
tea beneath a hanging piano, attired outlandishly  faces painted with
various signs, such as hieroglyphics or animals, and carrots, radishes or
spoons inserted into their lapel buttonholes. In 1913 they also produced a
film parodying Symbolisms pretentiousness, entitled Drama in Cabaret No.
13. From 1915 to 1917 he lived in the Urals with his wifes family,
visiting Moscow and Petrograd regularly. He published the Newspaper of the
Futurists in 1918 with Kamensky and Mayakovsky.

In 1920, Burliuk immigrated to Japan with his wife where he continued his
futurist activities. They remained until 1922, when they immigrated to the
United States and settled in New York. There, Burliuk pursued a radio-
style, based on the concept of hidden forces revealing personal memories
through radio wave physics. He and his wife Marussia published the journal
Color and Rhyme (1930-1966).

References and further readings:

Stephanie Barron and Maurice Tuchman (eds.), The Avant-Garde in Russia 1910-
1930, New Perspectives, Los Angeles County Museum of Art, 1980.

National Art Museum of Ukraine, Ukrainian Modernism 1910-1930, Khmelnytsky:
Halereia, 2006.

Noha, Oles. Davyd Burliuk i mystetstvo vsesvitnohoavanhardu, Lvyv, 1993.

Ukrainian National Museum, Futurism and After David Burliuk 1882-1967 New
York; The Ukrainian Museum, 2008.

