
Sarah Rogers

                                                                   317 words

Corm, Daoud (1852-1930 Lebanon)

Recognised as the father of modern art in Lebanon, Daoud Corm was a pioneer
in establishing a market for oil painting in the countrys private sector.
Born in Mount Lebanon, then part of the Ottoman Empire, Corm traveled to
Rome in the late 1860s to study at the Accademia di San Luca. He returned
to Beirut in 1878. Working mainly in oil on canvas and pastel on paper,
Corm depicted Beiruts emerging mercantile class in his signature style: a
pared down, formal, three-quarter length portrait against a dark background
with an attention to the individuals social and professional standing. In
addition to his portraits, Corm created a substantial body of religious
works, the majority of which were commissioned by the Maronite Church and
many of which remain in churches throughout Mount Lebanon. Before Corm, oil
painting was limited to clerics in the church, many of whom had been
trained by Italian missionaries and clerics at the Maronite College of
Rome, established in 1584. Corms historical significance thus lies in his
ability to forge a local market for oil portraits, previously reserved for
religious figures. Corm exhibited his work abroad in Egypt and Europe, most
notably at the 1889 Versailles Exhibition in France and at the 1900 Paris
Exhibition, where he received the Prize of Honor of Excellence.

References and further reading:

Daoud Corm, accessed November 18 2013,
http://www.onefineart.com/en/artists/daoudcorm.

Barbican Center (1989) Lebanon: The Artists View, 200 Years of Lebanese
Painting London: Quartet, pp.101-104.

Fani, Michel (1998) Dictionnaire de la Peinture au Liban, Paris: Editions
de lEscalier, pp.76-81.

Lahoud, Edouard (1974) Lart contemporain au Liban. (Beyrouth: Dar el-
Machreq.

Rogers, Sarah (2010) Daoud Corm, Cosmopolitan Nationalism, and the Origins
of Lebanese Modern Art, Arab Studies Journal vXVIII/No. 1 (Spring): 46-77.

Sultan, Maha Aziza (2006) Rwd min nahdah al-fann al-tashkili fi Lubnan:
Corm, Srour wa Saleeby.(The Pioneers of Art in Lebanon: Corm, Srour, and
Saleeby), Beirut: Kaslik University, pp. 29-121.







