
DELLUC, Louis (October 14, 1890-March 22, 1924)

A prolific film reviewer and director of eight films in the early 1920s,
Louis Delluc (October 14, 1890-March 22, 1924) is renowned for having been
Frances first film critic  in that he was the first figure to develop and
apply specifically cinematic criteria in his reception of films. Delluc
began as a theatre critic and playwright before turning to film reviewing
in 1917, after exposure to the nascent Hollywood cinema of Griffith,
DeMille, and Chaplin. In the seven years up to his premature death, he
wrote for publications including Le Film, Paris-Midi, Le Journal du Cin-
Club and Cina, and developed a literary, often ironic writing style
privileging a radically subjective approach to the cinematic viewing
experience over the establishment of objective artistic norms. Delluc is
best known for having coined the term cinaste (a common French word for
filmmaker) and for propagating the theory of photognie, a concept
centred on the unique visual qualities that the cinema is able to impart on
its chosen objects. His films (including Fivre (1921), La Femme de nulle
part (1922) and LInondation (1923) are less acclaimed than his critical
writings, but evince affinities with the output of contemporaries such as
Jean Epstein, Abel Gance and Marcel LHerbier. In honour of his work, the
Prix Louis Delluc is awarded every year to promising young French
filmmakers.

File: delluc1.jpg

Further reading:

Delluc, L. (1985-1990) crits cinmatographiques, vol. I-III, ed. Pierre
Lherminier. Paris: Cinmathque franaise.

Abel, R. (1988, ed.): French Film Theory and Criticism: A History/Anthology
vol I: 1907-1929. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Delluc, G. (2002) Louis Delluc 1890-1924: Lveilleur du cinma franais au
temps des annes folles. Prigueux: Pilote 24 dition.

Lherminier, P. (2008) Louis Delluc et le cinma franais. Paris: Ramsay.

List of works:

Fume noire (France, 1920).

Le Silence (France, 1920).

Le Chemin dErnoa (France, 1920).

Fivre (France, 1921).

Le Tonnerre (France, 1921).

La Femme de nulle part (France, 1922).

LInondation (France, 1923).

Daniel Fairfax
Yale University


