
Discpolo, Armando (1887-1971)

Armando Discepolo was an Argentine playwright credited with the creation of
the grotesco criollo genre in the 1920s and 30s. The son of first and
second-generation Italian immigrants, Discepolo entered the Buenos Aires
theatre world at a time of transition in audience tastes. Lower-class
entertainment represented by the sainete criollo  (comic one-act plays
often featuring tango music) remained popular in the commercialized theatre
of the city. Meanwhile comic folk dramas by writers such as Florencio
Sanchez had attracted a growing middle-class audience and the attention of
critics. Discepolos career began in the sainete genre, and he often
collaborated with other writers, including his brother Enrique Santos
Discepolo, who was a successful lyricist of tango songs.

The transition from the comic sainete to the grotesco occurred with Mateo
(1923), which fused comic caricature, typical of the sainete, with
emotional depth. Tragicomic characteristics of the new genre included
immigrant characters in financial distress, play on words, and physical
clumsiness. The characters ultimate loneliness reverberated with the
spiritual void represented in European expressionism. Mueca [The Doll]
(1925) shows a more direct influence of the Italian grottescos of
Pirandello. Stfano (1928), which is considered a masterpiece of the
grotesco genre, features an immigrant musician who is so fixated on his own
failed artistic ambitions that he ignores the needs of his family. The more
pessimistic Relojero [Watchmaker] (1934) was written during the
dictatorship and crisis of the 30s. The Buenos Aires intellectuals of the
time overlooked Discepolos grotescos while favoring a nascent independent
theatre, which shied away from commercialized theatre. Discepolos grotesco
criollo plays are recognized as a great accomplishment of Argentine
theatrical practice and have influenced later authors such as Roberto Cossa
and Griselda Gambaro.


List of Works

Pellettieri, Osvaldo, ed. (1987) Obra dramatica de Armando Discepolo,
Buenos Aires: Editorial Universitaria de Buenos Aires.

Discpolo, Armando. (1969) Obras escogidas, Buenos Aires: Editorial J.
Alvarez.

------ (1921) Mustaf, El Teatro Argentino 3 (40).

------ (1923) Mateo, Bambalinas 6 (275).

------ (1925) Mueca, Bambalinas 7 (355).

------ (1926) El organito, La Escena 9 (407).

------ (1928) Stfano, La Escena 11 (519).

------ (1934) Relojero, Argentores 1 (13).


References and further reading

Loayza, M. (2009) David Viass Theory of Grotesco and the Glocal Scene of
Habitus Production, Journal of Dramatic Theory and Criticism 23(2):
11130.

Majstorovic, G. (2014) Dissonant Echoes of the Great War: the Avant-garde,
Urban Space, and Immigrant Voices in Armando
DiscpolosBabilonia,Iberoamericana 14 (53): 13951.

Sanhueza-Carvajal, M. T. (2004) Continuidad, transformacion y cambio: El
grotesco criollo de Armando Discepolo, Buenos Aires: Editorial Nueva
Generacion.

Vinas, D. (1973) Grotesco, inmigracion y fracaso: Armando Discepolo, Buenos
Aires: Corregidor.


Milton Loayza, SUNY-Oswego


IMAGES & PARATEXTUAL MATERIAL

Enrique Santos Discepolo
Link to http://www.alternativateatral.com/obra8513-el-organito
Site shows example of play written in collaboration with brother, of recent
Buenos Aires production with information and pictures of production.
Copyright?

Stfano
jpeg picture of actor Luis Arata in original production of play,
illustrates tragicomic characterization. Provided in JPEG document. Taken
from webpage http://www.cerogrupoteatro.com.ar/stefano_la_obra.htm
No copyright
[pic]
