
                          El Saadawi, Nawal (1931-)

Yaser Mirdamadi, University of Edinburgh

SUMMARY
Nawal El Saadawi is a renowned Egyptian writer, novelist, feminist
activist, political dissident, physician and psychiatrist. The main themes
of her works are the suppression and suffering of women in a patriarchal
society backed by religion. She is specifically famous for her struggle
against female circumcision. She is regarded as one of the most radical
feminists of the Arab and Muslim world.



MAIN ENTRY


Nawal El Saadawi was born in 1931 in a village called Kafir Talha in the
delta region of Egypt. Her father was a civil servant and her mother came
from an upper-class family. She was forced to undergo circumcision when she
was 6 years old. Nawal studied medicine at the university of Cairo. She
graduated in 1955 and first practiced as a physiatrist. She was appointed
in 1958 to the Ministry of Health. In 1966 she received a Master of Public
Health degree from Columbia University and became director of public
health. In 1972, after the publication of her taboo-breaking first work of
non-fiction,Woman and Sex, and specifically her protest in this book
against female circumcision and its relation to religion, she lost her job.
She was also dismissed of her jobs as editor-in-chief of the journal Health
and assistant general secretary in the Medical Association in Egypt. From
that time onwards she has been engaged in an inexhaustible and long-
standing struggle for freedom of expression and womens emancipation in
Egypt and more generally the Arab and Muslim world. In 197980 she served
as the United Nations Adviser for the Womens Program in Africa and the
Middle East. In 1981 she was captured and imprisoned for two months after
she criticised the one-party rule of Egyptian president Anwar Sadat.
Inspired by her imprisonment, she wrote her novel The Fall of the Imam.
Just after her release she founded a NGO and a feminist organization called
the Arab Women's Solidarity Association (AWSA) that was devoted to the
problems of women. The Egyptian government in 1991 closed down AWSA and due
to the pressures put on her by Muslim fundamentalists in 1992 she went into
exile. From 1988 till 1993 her name appeared on death lists issued by
Muslim fundamentalist groups. In the USA she taught at Duke University in
North Carolina and Washington State University in Seattle. In 1997 she
returned to Egypt.
Once again, however, she faced trouble in 2001 when in an interview she
suggested that Islamic pilgrimage has its origins in a pagan tradition, and
emphasised that the Islamic law of inheritance is discriminatory toward
women. She was consequently accused of apostasy and a lawyer tried to force
her to divorce her husband since according to Islamic law a non-Muslim
cannot marry or continue his/her marriage with a Muslim, although the case
was not eventually successful. Yet another case in 2008 demanded the
withdrawal of her Egyptian nationality because of her play God Resigns at
the Summit Meeting that was published in Cairo in 2007. When protests in
Egypt, as a part of what is called the Arab Spring began, she attended
protests in the famous public square in Cairo called Tahrir. In a 2010
interview she expressed her view about veiling suggesting that the veil
should be banned. She also frequently considered religions (Islam as well
as other religions) as patriarchal and the main source of oppression
against women. She was awarded, among other awards, the 2004 North-South
Prize by the Council of Europe. She has published over forty books and her
books have been translated into over twenty languages. Her most famous
novel, Woman at Point Zero, was published in Beirut in 1973 and translated
into English by her husband Sherif Hetata in 1983. The common themes of her
fiction and non-fiction works are the suppression and suffering of women
backed by religions. Her approach toward religion, that is reminiscent of
that of Richard Dawkins, has continued to be the subject of much heated
criticism inside and outside Egypt.




List of Her translated works:

     The Hidden Face of Eve [Study] (London: Zed Books, 1980), reissued
      2008
     Woman at Point Zero [novel] (London: Zed Books, 1982), reissued 2008
     God Dies by the Nile [novel] (London: Zed Books, 1984) reissued 2008
     Circling Song [novel] (London: Zed Books, 1986) reissued 2008
     The Fall of Imam [novel] (London: Methuen, 1987) Saqui Books London
      2001, 2009.
     Searching [novel] (London: Zed Books, 1988) reissued 2008
     Death of an Ex-minister [short stories] (London: Methuen, 1987)
     She has no Place in Paradise [short stories] (London: Methuen, 1987)
     My Travel Around the World [non-fiction] (London: Methuen, 1985)
     Memoirs from the Womens Prison [non-fiction] (London: Womens Press,
      1985) (also: University of California Press, USA, 1995)
     Two Women in One [novel] (London: Saqi, 1992) reissued 2013.
     Memoirs of a Women Doctor [novel] (London: Methuen, 1994) (also: City
      Lights, USA, 1993)
     The Well of Life [two novels] (London: Methuen, 1994)
     The Innocence of the Devil [novel] (London: Methuen, 1994) (also:
      University of California Press, 1995)
     Nawal El Saadawi Reader [non-fiction essays] (London: Zed Books, 1997)
     Vol 11 Nawal El Saadawi Reader (Zed Books, 2009)
     Part I A Daughter of Isis [autobiography] (London: Zed Books, 1999)
      reissued 2008
     Part II Walking Through Fire [autobiography] (London: Zed Books, 2002)
      reissued 2008
     Love in the Kingdom of oil [novel] (London: Alsaqui Books, 2001)
     The Novel [novel] (Northampton, Mass: Interlink Books, 2009)
     Zeina [novel] (London: Saqi Books, 2011)


Further Reading:

arabishi, Jurj, and Nawal Sadawi. Woman Against Her Sex: A Critique of
Nawal El-Saadawi with a Reply by Nawal El-Saadawi. Saqi Books, 1988.

Royer, Diana. A Critical Study of the Works of Nawal El Saadawi, Egyptian
Writer and Activist. Edwin Mellen Press, 2001.

Faulkner, Rita. National Allegory: Land and Body in Nawal El Saadawi and
Assia Djebar. University of Illinois, 2005.

Mohammed, Razinat. Intra-Gender Relations Between Women: A Study of Nawal
El-Saadawi and Buchi Emechetas Novels. Lap Lambert Academic Publishing,
2012.
-----------------------
                      Nawal El Saadawi at the age of 80
   url: http://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/mar/08/nawal-el-saadawi-100-
                                    women

                    Nawal El Saadawi among male doctors,
                       Ministry of Health, Cairo 1963.
        Taken from: A Daughter of Isis: The Autobiography   of Nawal El
Saadawi. London: Zed Books, 1999, p. 353.


                     Nawal El Saadawi in Prison in 1981
Taken from: A Daughter of Isis: The Autobiography of Nawal El Saadawi.
London: Zed Books, 1999, p. 32.

    Guardians interview with Nawal El Saadawi (a short video and text):

    http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/apr/15/nawal-el-saadawi-
                              egyptian-feminist

         Nawal El Saadawi among protesters in Tahrir Square in 2011
url: http://www.newsweek.com/feminists-tahrir-square-66139


