
EMAK BAKIA (1926)

Emak Bakia (Basque for Leave me alone) is a  16  minutes  long  black  and
white silent film directed by Man Ray. Subtitled a cine-poem, it  features
no   obvious   narrative.   Its   structure   emerges   through   rhythmical
juxtapositions of disparate images - decontextualized  machine  parts,  some
sculptures by Picasso,  neon  lights  and  revolving  ads,  cityscapes  etc.
Alice Kiki Prin, Man Rays muse and partner at the time, features in  some
of the scenes. The film is also notable for the  use  of  several  of  Rays
innovative  photographic  techniques,   including   double   exposures   and
Rayographs, which arecamera-less photographs in which the image is  obtained
by placing the object  directly  on  a  photosensitive  surface.  While  Ray
maintains that he had complied  with  all  the  principles  of  Surrealism:
irrationality, automatism, psychological  and  dreamlike  sequences  without
apparent logic (222), the film still retains a  strong  dadaist  influence:
its use of  paratactic  montage  and  the  ironic  display  of  conventional
narrative elements (late in the  film  a  single  title  card  incongruously
reads The reason for this extravagance) are reminiscent of Lgers  Ballet
Mcanique and Duchamps Anmic Cinma. The latter is also suggested by  Emak
Bakias quasi  palindromic  title.  Although  the  film  originally  had  no
soundtrack, some dubbed copies exist, one,  most  notably,  featuring  music
from Man Rays personal record collection.

References and Further Reading:
Ray, Man (1963) Self Potrait. Boston: Little Brown.Aiken, Edward A. (1983)
Emak Bakia Reconsidered. Art Journal 43(3): 240-246.

White, Mimi (1984) Two French Dada Films: Entr'Acte and Emak Bakia.
Dada/Surrealism 13: 37-47.

Paratextual material:

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8V_zr-dVDws - The complete film

Maria Ioni
Ryerson University

