


La Chute de la Maison Usher (The Fall of the House of Usher) (1928)

Thomas Patrick Pringle (McGill University)

La Chute de la Maison Usher  [The Fall of the House of Usher, 1928] is an
adaptation of Edgar Allen Poes eponymous story and the best-known film of
French Impressionist director Jean Epstein. In the film, Roderick Usher
spends his time painting his illness-stricken wife, Madeline, alone in
their castle. When an unnamed friend of Usher visits, Madeline appears to
die and is quickly buried, but she subsequently returns to life and
destruction consumes the house. The film is heavily influenced by German
expressionism, while also exemplifying some of Epsteins most important
formal contributions. Epstein was fascinated by cinematographys proximity
to human perception. In his theoretical writings on the concept of
photognie, he argued that film is uniquely capable of animating the
material world by revealing sensibilities otherwise hidden. In one
particularly atmospheric sequence in Usher, Epstein animates a funeral
procession through double-exposure, slow motion, hand-held camerawork, and
impressionist editing patterns. Epstein used these methods to endow objects
with personalities, movement, and, in the films conclusion, a dangerous
vitality. Surrealist Luis Buuel worked on the film as an assistant to
Epstein, but quit after a creative disagreementsetting the stage for
Buuels formal disavowal of Impressionist aesthetics with Un Chien Andalou
(1929).


[pic]    [pic]
[pic]
Image Source: http://sensesofcinema.com/2004/feature-
articles/la_chute_de_la_maison_usher/

Cinematic animism and photognie in the funeral procession:
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xH0aqW2x8po



References and Further Reading:

Aumont, Jacques, (Ed.) (1998) Jean Epstein: Cinaste, Pote, Philosophe.
Paris: Cinmathque Franaise.

Barreiro, M.S. (2013). Epsteins The Fall of the House of Usher: Research
on Altered States of Consciousness. Literature Film Quarterly, 41.3:197-
209.

Keller, S. and Paul, J. (Eds.) (2012) Jean Epstein: Critical Essays and New
Translations. Amsterdam: Amsterdam UP.

Turvey, M. (2008) Doubting Vision: Film and the Revelationist Tradition.
New York: Oxford UP.



