

Naum Gabo, Naum (1890-1977)

The work I suggest for an illustration is Linear Construction in Space No.
2, 1970-71, based on a prototype of 1949-1953, plastic and nylon threads,
1130 x 600 x 590 mm., Tate, London, Presented by the artist through the
American Federation of Arts. Tate reference T01105


Gabo was one of the first artists to create constructed sculptures, which
he built up from flat planar elements in space. His initial works,
developed in Norway (1915-1917) were figurative (e.g. Head No. 1 and 2),
but in Russia (1917-1922) he adopted an abstract idiom (e.g. Column, 1920-
1921) which was based on two intersecting vertical planes.  The Realistic
Manifesto (1920) explained that his art was inspired by the ideas and forms
of science and engineering and reflected the progressive political and
social forces shaping the modern world. In 1920-1 he produced the first
kinetic sculpture - Kinetic Construction (Standing Wave) - which consisted
of a metal rod that oscillated by means of a motor to produce a virtual
volume in space. In the 1920s, Gabo started using plastics. In Britain, he
moved away from a rectilinear geometry to develop a style based on more
organic forms (e.g. Spiral Theme, 1941). Reflecting his desire to express
the continuity and curvilinear quality of space, he developed Spheric Theme
(1937) and employed  stringing (Linear Construction in Space No.1 and 2,
1941 and 1949-1953), initially using nylon monofilament, but later
employing more durable metal springs woven around metal armatures (Linear
Construction in Space No. 4).

Gabo came from a Russian Jewish background, and worked in Germany (1922-
1933), France (1933-1936) and Britain (1936-1946), before settling in the
USA and adopting American citizenship in 1952. He  started making
sculptures in Norway (1915-1917), without having received any artistic
training, but having studied medicine and natural sciences at the
University of Munich, where he also encountered mathematical models and
acquired a knowledge of engineering. While visiting his older brother
Antoine Pevsner in Paris (1912, 1913), Gabo had also seen works by the
French avant-garde.

Returning to Russia after the February Revolution of 1917, Gabo worked for
the Fine Art Department within the Commissariat for Enlightenment and
embraced the idea of art as a part of everyday life. None of his numerous
public art projects were realised until after the Second World War (e.g.
Bijenkorf Construction, Rotterdam, 1957; and Revolving Torsion, St Thomass
Hospital, London, 1976).

In the West, Gabo became associated with International Constructivism,
which expressed progressive values through geometric forms and modern
materials.  He contributed to G: zur elementaren Gestaltung (Berlin, No. 1,
1923), edited by Hans Richter. Unlike the Soviet Constructivists, Gabo did
not reject art in favour of unalloyed utility, but extended arts remit to
include design, believing that his art had the  power to transform the
world. He designed the set and costumes for the ballet La Chatte (1927),
and devised a design and a structural system for the Palace of the Soviets
Competition (1931).  1n 1937, Gabo became a leader of British
Constructivism, editing Circle: International Survey of Constructive Art
with the architect Leslie Martin and Ben Nicholson. While in St Ives, in
1943-4, Gabo developed a motor car for the Jowett Car Company (through the
Design Research Unit). In his final years he also produced monoprints and
occasional paintings.


Bibliography

Gabo: Constructions, Sculpture, Paintings, Drawings, Engravings (1957), ,
London: , Lund Humphries, 1957.

S. Nash, S.  & J. Merkert, J.  eds., (1985) Naum Gabo:  Sixty Years of
Constructivism, Munich: , Prestel Verlag, l985.

C. Sanderson, C. and C. Lodder, C. (1985) "Catalogue Raisonn of the
Constructions and Sculptures of Naum Gabo", in eds., S. Nash & J. Merkert,
Naum Gabo:  Sixty Years of Constructivism, Munich, Prestel Verlag, l985,
pp. 193-272


M. Hammer, M.  and C. Lodder, C. (2000) Constructing Modernity: The Art and
Career of Naum Gabo, New Haven and London:, Yale University Press, 2000.

M. Hammer, M.  and C.Lodder C. (2000), Gabo on Gabo: Texts and Interviews,
Forest Row UK: , Artists Bookworks, 2000.


                                                   C.L.

