
Gerhard, Roberto (b.1896, Valls, Spain - d.1970, Cambridge, England).
Monty Adkins

Roberto Gerard studied piano with Granados in 1915 and composition with
Felip Pedrell from 1916-1922, producing a number of important early works
including the Dos Apunts (1921-2) for piano and the Seven Haiku (1922 rev.
1958) for voice, wind quartet and piano. A decisive turning point was his
move to Germany in 1923 to study with Schoenberg. Like Alban Berg, Gerard's
use of serial technique was unorthodox. The Wind Quintet (1928) uses
Schoenberg's technique of continuous variation but uses a tone row of seven
notes rather than the usual twelve. Gerard returned to Spain in 1929 but
was forced into exile by the Franco regime and moved to England in 1939
where he remained until his death. During his period in England Gerard
wrote many of his most important works. These often combine elements of
serialism, catalan folk music and more sonically-driven passages influenced
by his work with electronic music and include two string quartets, four
symphonies, concertos for violin, harpsichord and piano, and an opera The
Duenna. Gerard was the first composer in England to investigate electronic
sound. His first work in the medium was for Bridget Boland's play The
Prisoner in 1954. He continued to incorporate electronic music into a
number of scores for radio and theatre productions as well as concert works
including the Symphony No. 3 'Collages' (1960) and The Anger of Achilles
(1964) which won the Prix Italia in 1965. From 1960 onwards all of Gerard's
major works are in one movement and culminate in a series of large-scale
chamber and orchestral works including the String Quartet No. 2 (1960-62),
Hymnody (1963) Epithalamion (1966), Libra (1968), and Leo (1969).

Gerard's musical idiom can split into a number of discrete phases: the
early Spanish works often influenced by Stravinsky and Schoenberg (up to
1922); his early serial work whilst studying in Vienna and Berlin with
Schoenberg (1923-28); more folk inspired works on his return to Spain and
his early time in England (1929-1951) and finally his mature synthesis of
serialism, folk music and later electronic music (1951-1970). It was while
England that Gerhard's mature style emerged. Throughout the 1940s and 1950s
Gerhard experimented with form and time in music developing his own notion
of serialism. His first mature fully serial composition was the Concerto
for Piano and String Orchestra (1951). Gerhard did not treat the twelve
tone series as a fixed set but rather adopted a freer hexachordal approach
in which the series was split into two six-note groups that provided a
resource from which pitch and harmonic materials could be developed. This
technique founds its culmination in the Symphony No. 2 (1957-59) in which
the series is used not only to control the pitch structure of the work but
also the large-scale temporal form. In the late 1950s Gerhard developed his
electronic music studio and was one of the few serious composers to work at
the BBC Radiophonic Workshop. In his electronic music, which Gerhard
preferred to call sound composition, he often used recordings of
instruments and his own works as material for further manipulation in the
studio. In this respect, Gerhard's approach is similar to Xenakis' early
work in the medium, namely the pursuit of an abstract electronic music made
from concrete sound materials. As a result of working with electronics
Gerhard came to think of music differently. In his notebooks he write
'music is not notes but sonic motion' and that for him, working in the
electronic medium had resulted in a 'number of far-reaching morphological
changes in the manner of organising sound and it seems to me that these
changes are bound to affect methods of composition in the traditional field
of instrumental composition as well.' Throughout the 1960s Gerhard's music
became less about melody and more concerned with texturally driven layers
of sound in time often still serially organised. The epitome of this
synthesis of elements in his mature style can be found in the Concerto for
Orchestra (1965) and Symphony No. 4 'New York' (1966). At the time of his
death Gerhard was working on a fifth symphony.


Principal works
Opera: The Duenna (1945-47); Vocal: Cantata (1932), The Plague (1963-64);
Orchestral: Symphony No. 1 (1952-53), Symphony No. 2 (1957-59), Symphony
No. 3 'Collages' (1960), Concerto for Orchestra (1965), Epithalamion
(1966), Symphony No. 4 'New York' (1967); Concerto: Concerto for Violin and
Orchestra (1942-43), Concerto for Piano and String Orchestra (1951),
Concerto for Harpsichord, Percussion and Strings (1955-56); Ballet: Ariel
(1934), Don Quixote (1940-41) Chamber: Wind Quintet (1928), String Quartet
No. 1 (1950-55), Nonet (1956-57), String Quartet No. 2 (1960-62), Hymnody
(1963), Libra (1968), Leo (1969); Electronic: Lament for the Death of a
Bullfighter (1959), Caligula (1961), Audiomobile 2 'DNA in Reflection'
(1963).

References and further reading:
Atherton, D. (ed.), (1973), Programme book for the London Sinfonietta's
Schoenberg-Gerhard series
Bowen, M. (ed.), (2000), Gerhard on Music. Selected Writings. Aldershot,
Ashgate
Homs, J. (ed. Bowen, M.) (2000), Roberto Gerhard and his Music, Anglo-
Catalan Society, Sheffield
Sproston, D. (2009), Serial Structures in Roberto Gerhard's First and
Second Symphonies' in Tempo No. 248: 21-34
White, J. (1993), National Traditions in the Music of Roberto Gerhard in
Tempo No. 184: 2-13




