
Giacometti, Giovanni Alberto Giacometti (19011966)

Alberto Giacometti was a titan of twentieth-century art, his rich oeuvre of
sculpture, painting and drawing ranking alongside pioneering artists such
as Pablo Picasso, Henri Matisse and Constantin Brncui. Giacometti arrived
in Paris in 1922 to study at the Acadmie de la Grande Chaumire in
Montparnasse with Frances then leading sculptor, Emile-Antoine Bourdelle ,
attending periodically until 1927 and principally creating drawings in a
Cubist manner. By the mid-late 1920s, Giacomettis sculpture was intimately
associated with Surrealism and his exhibition at the Gallery Pierre in
particular attracted the attention of its leader Andr Breton, who would
later acquire Suspended Ball (1930), as well as drawing the admiration and
support of fellow artist-friends including Andr Masson, Hans Arp, Man Ray,
Salvador Dal and Picasso. Giacometti not only became close friends with
art theorists like Georges Bataille (1897-1962), Michel Leiris (1901-1990)
and others surrounding the dissident periodical Documents in 1929-30, but
important writers and intellectuals such as Jean-Paul Sartre, Samuel Becket
(1906-1989) and Simone de Beauvoir (1908-1986). By 1934, Giacometti
departed the Surrealist milieu, the rupture coinciding with a return to the
life model and bringing about a new philosophical awareness in his
sculpture. Existential theories relating to isolation, helplessness and
disquiet that come from the writings of Jean-Paul Sartre, including Nausea
(1938) and Being and Nothingness (1943) concur with Giacomettis tall
standing figures of the late 1940s and early 1950s.

Giacometti was born on October 10, 1901 in the village of Borgonovo in the
Bregaglia valley, in Italian-speaking Switzerland. His father, Giovanni,
was a post-impressionist painter who had studied in Paris, his mother,
Annette, from a wealthy family in the locality of Stampa. Giacometti had
three siblings, his brothers Bruno and Diego, and sister Ottilia. Bruno was
also an artist-craftsman who would inhabit Albertos life and work,
consistently posing for him until his brothers death in 1961.

Alberto Giacometti was a titan of twentieth-century art, his rich oeuvre of
sculpture, painting and drawing ranking alongside pioneering artists such
as Pablo Picasso (1881-1973), Henri Matisse (1869-1954) and Constantin
Brncui (1876-1957). Influenced by modernist movements in Paris and
inspired by tribal art, particularly ancient Egyptian, Cycladic, Sumerian,
African, Oceanic and Mesoamerican forms, Giacometti synthesized these
primitive sources with the Cubist idiom to develop, in 1926-27, as series
of highly compact, totemic works that strongly recall the sculptures of
Brncui, Henri Laurens (1885-1954) and Jacques Lipchitz.  (1891-1973).
Giacomettis interest in the Cubist vocabulary is evidenced by figurative
compositions that include Torso (1925-26, Alberto Giacometti Foundation,
Kunsthaus, Zurich) and Man [Cubist Composition] (c. 1926-27, plaster
version, Ohara Museum, Kurashiki, Japan). The latter simultaneously
demonstrate sculptors working knowledge of the Cubism as well as his
gradual move towards a surrealist visualiszation of the figure, where the
form is merged with, or menaced by, eerie shapes, claw or pitchfork-like
elements. Giacometti soon acquired a reputation as one of the most original
sculptors working in Paris and by 1929-30 his work began to gather critical
momentum, featuring in important exhibitions of contemporary sculpture
including the Galerie Georges Bernheim and the Galerie Pierre [Loeb] in
Paris. Here sculptures such as Three Figures Outdoors (1929) and the famous
Suspended Ball (1930, Private collection, Paris) were exhibited in the
company of illustrious sculptors including Aristide Maillol,  (1861-1944),
Brncui, Lipchitz, Joan Mir (1893-1983) and Alexander Calder (1898-1976).
Giacomettis works of the late 1920s and early 1930s combine an exploration
of forms with intimations of physical violence, onanistic sex and pain, and
are an obvious reassessment of Surrealist themes. By 1934, Giacometti
departed the Surrealist milieu, the rupture coinciding with a return to the
life model and bringing about a new philosophical awareness in his
sculpture. Existential theories relating to isolation, helplessness and
disquiet that come from the writings of Jean-Paul Sartre (1905-1980),
including Nausea (1938) and Being and Nothingness (1943) concur with
Giacomettis tall standing figures of the late 1940s and early 1950s. In
works such as Head on a Rod (1947, Collection M. and Mme Maeght, Paris),
The Hand (1947, Alberto Giacometti Foundation, Kunstmuseum, Winterthur),
and Three Men Walking (1948, Foundation Marguerite et Aim Maeght, St Paul)
there is a preoccupation with the tragedy of the human condition and
seemingly anguished figures: figures placed in bleak isolation and wasted
away by the surrounding space.
Giacometti was born on October 10, 1901 in the village of Borgonovo in the
Bregaglia valley, in Italian-speaking Switzerland. His father, Giovanni,
was a post-impressionist painter who had studied in Paris, his mother,
Annette, from a wealthy family in the locality of Stampa. Giacometti had
three siblings, his brothers Bruno and Diego, and sister Ottilia. Bruno was
also an artist-craftsman who would inhabit Albertos life and work,
consistently posing for him until his brothers death in 1961. Giacometti
arrived in Paris in 1922 to study at the Acadmie de la Grande Chaumire in
Montparnasse with Frances then leading sculptor, Emile-Antoine Bourdelle
(1861-1929), attending periodically until 1927 and principally creating
drawings in a Cubist manner. By the mid-late 1920s, Giacomettis sculpture
was intimately associated with Surrealism and his exhibition at the Gallery
Pierre in particular attracted the attention of its leader Andr Breton,
who would later acquire Suspended Ball, as well as drawing the admiration
and support of fellow artist-friends including Andr Masson (1896-1887),
Hans Arp (1886-1966), Man Ray (1890-1976), Salvador Dal (1904-1989) and
Picasso. Giacometti not only became close friends with art theorists like
Georges Bataille (1897-1962), Michel Leiris (1901-1990) and others
surrounding the dissident periodical Documents in 1929-30, but important
writers and intellectuals such as Jean-Paul Sartre, Samuel Becket (1906-
1989) and Simone de Beauvoir (1908-1986).

References and further reading:

Alberto Giacometti: la Collection du Muse national dart Moderne. (1999),
la collection du Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris: Runion des Muses
Nationaux.

Bonnefoy, Y. (1991) [2001], Alberto Giacometti: A Biography of his Work,
translated by J. Stewart, Paris: Flammarion.

Crescenzo, Di. C. (1994), Alberto Giacometti: Early Works in Paris, 1922-
1930, New York: Yoshii Gallery.

Elliot, P. and Stooss T. (1996), Alberto Giacometti: 1901-1966, Edinburgh:
National Galleries of Scotland.

Hohl, R. (1972), Alberto Giacometti, London: Thames and Hudson.

Hohl, R. (ed.) (1998), Giacometti: A Biography in Pictures, Stuttgart,
Germany: Verlag Gerd Hatje.

Krauss, R. Giacometti (1984), in Primitivism in 20th Century Art:
Affinity of the Tribal and the Modern, New York: Museum of Modern Art
(pp. 502-534).

Lord, J. (1986) [1996], Giacometti: a Biography, London: Phoenix Giant.



Image suggestions:

Suspended Ball (1930, Private Collection, Paris).

A corner of Giacomettis studio with Invisible Object: Hands Holding the
Void, photographed by Dora Maar, 1934 (Collection of Timothy Baum, New
York).

Head on a Rod (1947, Collection M. and Mme Maeght, Paris).
