
Grimk, Angelina Weld (1880-1958)

African American poet, fiction writer, and playwright Angelina Weld Grimk
was born in Boston in 1880, the daughter of Sarah Stanley, who was white,
and Archibald H. Grimk, who was African American and vice-president of the
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP). She was
named for her great-aunt, the white abolitionist Angelina Grimk Weld, who
died shortly before the playwright was born. As a schoolgirl, Grimk began
publishing fiction and poetry. She was politically engaged, and at the age
of nineteen collected signatures for a petition against lynching. Lynching
was also the subject of her best-known literary work, a full-length play
titled Rachel. This play, produced in 1916, was the first non-musical play
that was written, professionally produced, and performed by African
Americansan accomplishment for which James V. Hatch dubbed Grimk the
Mother of African American Drama (qtd. in Gray 245). Grimk is not
significant simply because she broke ground; to the contrary, her drama
foundationally influenced African American theatre. Judith L. Stephens
shows that Rachel inaugurated the genre of the anti-lynching drama, which
was to include at least eleven extant plays written by African-American
women between 1916 and 1933. As Koritha Mitchell, Errol G. Hill, and Hatch
have shown, Rachel was a key source of the debate, usually ascribed to W.
E. B. Du Bois and Alain Locke, on whether African American plays should aim
to produce propaganda or art for its own sake. In recent years, Grimks
poetry has also gained scholarly attention, in part for its homoerotic
content.

List of Works

Herron, Carolivia. (Ed.) (1991) Selected Works of Angelina Weld Grimk, New
      York: Oxford University Press.

References and Further Reading

Bernstein, Robin. (2007) Never Born: Angelina Weld Grimks Rachel as
      Ironic Response to Topsy, The Journal of American Drama and Theatre
      19(2) (Spring): 61-75.

Gray, Christina R. (1999) Discovering and Recovering African American
      Women Playwrights Writing before 1930, in The Cambridge Companion to
      American Women Playwrights, ed. Brenda Murphy, Cambridge: Cambridge
      University Press, 244-253.

Hill, Errol G., and James V. Hatch. (2003) A History of African American
Theatre, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Hull, Gloria T. (1983) Under the Days: The Buried Life and Poetry of
      Angelina Weld Grimk, in Home Girls: A Black Feminist Anthology, ed.
      Barbara Smith, New York: Kitchen Table: Women of Color Press, 73-82.

----- (1987) Angelina Weld Grimk (1880-1958), in Color, Sex & Poetry:
      Three Women Writers of the Harlem Renaissance, Bloomington: Indiana
      University Press, 107-152.

Mitchell, Koritha. Antilynching Plays: Angelina Weld Grimk, Alice Dunbar-
      Nelson, and the Evolution of African American Drama, Post-Bellum, Pre-
      Harlem: African American Literature and Culture, 1877-1919, ed.
      Barbara McCaskill and Caroline Gebhard, New York: New York University
      Press, 211-230.

-----  (2006) Living with Lynching: African American Lynching Plays,
      Performance, and Citizenship, 1890-1930.  Urbana, IL: University of
      Illinois Press, 2011.

Perkins, Kathy A., and Judith L. Stephens. (eds.) (1998) Strange Fruit:
      Plays on Lynching by American Women, Indiana: Indiana University
      Press.

Robin Bernstein, Harvard University


Recommended Illustrations

[pic]

Angelina Weld Grimk
[Available at: http://www.aaregistry.org/historic_events/view/angelina-
grimke-teacher-and-first-black-stage
AND
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Angelina_Weld_Grimk%C3%A9 ]



