
Henri, Robert (1865-1929)

Robert Henri is best known an inspirational teacher and as the leader of
the Ashcan School, a group of Realist painters who portrayed New York City
life in the first decades of the twentieth century. His works ranged from
tonalist landscapes, to full-length portraits of socialites and performers,
to an extensive series of ordinary people from different cultures, many of
them children.

Robert Henry Cozad grew up on the Ohio frontier, where his father was a
land developer. In 1882, however, the Cozads fled to Atlantic City and
changed their names to avoid a murder scandal. Robert took his middle name
as his last, changing it to a French spelling but pronouncing it Hen-rye.

At the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts in 1886, Henri adopted a
Realist style, which he honed in Paris at the Academie Julian. Back in
Philadelphia, he taught at local art schools and in 1892 formed the
Charcoal Club. This informal weekly discussion and sketching session
included JOHN SLOAN and other local newspaper illustrators, including
William J. Glackens, George Luks, Everett Shinn, who Henri encouraged to
become painters of contemporary life.

Henri studied the works of Diego Velzquez, Rembrandt, and Frans Hals on
several more European trips. In 1900 he settled in New York with his wife
Linda Craige (c. 1875-1905).

Henris early works included small landscapes influenced by Whistlerian
tonalism, such as La Neige (1899, Musee dOrsay), a small cityscape
exhibited at the 1899 Salon and purchased by the French government. He
established his career, however, as a painter of large-scale figure
paintings. He was invited to join the Society of American Artists and the
National Academy of Design in 1903 and 1905, respectively.

In 1908 he and Sloan organized the groundbreaking show of The Eight at
New Yorks Macbeth Galleries to protest the restrictive juried exhibitions
of the National Academy. Henri and his circle garnered a great deal of
notoriety for their rebellious show, which opened up new exhibition
opportunities for younger artists working in innovative styles. Henri was
also involved in the large, unjuried Exhibition of Independent Artists
(1910) and the famous International Exhibition of Modern Art (1913), more
popularly known as the Armory Show, which introduced modern art to American
audiences.

Henri married the cartoonist Marjorie Organ (1886-1930) in 1908. He
continued his travels to Europe, visiting Spain, Holland, Ireland, and the
American Southwest, often leading groups of art students. In these locales
sought out interesting faces to paint, executing them in a quick and lively
manner. He increasingly became known for these typessmall, intimate
portraits of ordinary people, who embodied universal human values and
represented specific racial or national characteristics. A cognoscenti of
modern theater and dance, Henri invited Isadora Duncan to perform in his
studio and painted full-length portraits of popular Spanish performers, the
dancer Ruth St. Denis, and Salome (from the popular Broadway play).

Following the color theories of Hardesty Maratta, in the early 1910s, Henri
and his friends began experimenting with a higher-keyed palette and a
fuller spectrum of colors, as exemplified by his portrait of the arts
patron Gertrude Vanderbilt Whitney (1916; Whitney Museum of American Art).

Throughout his career, Henri was an inspirational teacher to thousands of
art students, including Edward Hopper, Rockwell Kent, and Stuart Davis. The
Art Spirit, a compilation of his art and teaching philosophy, has been
issued in numerous editions since its original publication in 1923, and is
still required reading in many art schools.


References and further reading:

Literature:
Henri, Robert. (1923) The Art Spirit. Compiled by Marjorie Ryerson.
Philadelphia: Lippincott.
Homer, William Innes. Robert Henri and His Circle. (1988) Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press, 1969; rev. ed. New York: Hacker Art Books.
Leeds, Valerie Ann. (1994) My People: The Portraits of Robert Henri.
Orlando, FL: Orlando Museum of Art.
Perlman, Bennard. (1991) Robert Henri: His Life and Art. New York: Dover
Publications.
Sloan, John, and Robert Henri. (1997) Revolutionaries of Realism: The
Letters of John Sloan and Robert Henri. Edited by Bennard B. Perlman.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Images:
La Neige
http://www.musee-orsay.fr/en/collections/index-of-works/resultat-
collection.html?no_cache=1&zoom=1&tx_damzoom_pi1%5Bzoom%5D=0&tx_damszoom_pi1
%5BxmlId%5D=020616&tx_damzoom_pi1%5Bback%5D=en%2Fcollections%2Findex-of-
works%2Fresultat-collection.html%3Fno_cache%3D1%26zsz%3D9

http://whitney.org/Collection/RobertHenri
Gertrude Vanderbilt Whitney

Blind Spanish Singer
http://www.the-athenaeum.org/art/detail.php?ID=18786

http://www.nga.gov/fcgi-bin/timage_f?object=34637&image=5724&c=
Catherine

Cumulous Clouds, East River (Smithsonian American Art Museum, Washington,
DC)

Photos:
Portrait by Gertrude Kasebier, 1908.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Robert_Henri.jpg

http://sirismm.si.edu/aaa/newPOA/aaa_munswilp_4914.jpg--photo of Henri in
1908 (Archives of American Art)
http://sirismm.si.edu/aaa/newPOA/aaa_shinever_5423.jpg--Henri circa 1897,
Archives of American Art

Contributor: Margaret STENZ
