
Helena Bonett


Hepworth, Dame (Jocelyn) Barbara (19031975)

Barbara Hepworth was a British sculptor, draughtsperson, and painter and
printmaker, born in Yorkshire but based in London and St Ives in Cornwall,
with a career spanning the late 1920s to her death in 1975. Known for her
pioneering abstract sculpture  including pierced forms and multipart
arrangements    often carved in stone or wood, and, later in her career,
sculpted in plaster and bronze  Hepworth was one of the leaders of the
modernist movement in Britain. Her work also shares a confluence of ideas
with modernists on the continent, many of whom she first met in France in
the 1930s. At this time her work was predominantly carved in wood and
stone, but from the 1940s Hepworth began working with new materials,
employing stringing and colour in her carved pieces, and, in the following
decade, using plaster and bronze to create large-scale works. She was a
member of many groups, including Abstraction-Cration in Paris, the 7 & 5
Society and Unit One in London, and the Penwith Society of Arts in St Ives.
.., Hepworth pioneereding the pierced form in British modernist sculpture
and she is also known for introducing multiple forms within her sculptures.
Her work is often considered alongside that of Henry Moore, as she studied
and worked within the same artistic circles as him throughout her career in
Britain. The influence of the European modernists is also evident in her
work and through her visits to France in the 1930s with her then-husband,
Ben Nicholson. Here she met artists including Brancusi, Braque, Calder,
Kandinsky, Mondrian and Picasso and was invited to join the Parisian group
Abstraction-Cration. In London, she was a member of the 7 & 5 Society and
Unit One, in London,Engaged in a male-dominated art form, Hepworth
struggled to gain the same recognition as contemporaries such as Henry
Moore. Despite these difficulties, however, she gradually gained a
reputation on the international stage. Today,  and edited and designed the
publication Circle: International Survey of Constructive Art (1937).
SheHepworth and remainsremains one of Britains most famous and best-loved
sculptors.

Jocelyn Barbara Hepworth was born on 10 January 1903 in Wakefield,
Yorkshire, and studied at Leeds School of Art (192021) and the Royal
College of Art, London, where her contemporaries included Henry Moore
(192124), where her fellow students included the sculptor Henry Moore..
While in Italy on a scholarship, Hepworth learnt stone carving and married
the sculptor John Skeaping (the couplethey had one child, Paul, in 1929,
who was later killed died on RAF duty in 1953). Hepworth learnt stone
carving while resident in Rome (192526). Upon returning to London, she
held her first exhibition, with Skeaping, in 1928. Hepworths work at this
time was figurative, carved out of stone or wood, with a formal, hieratic
quality, as in, for example, Figure of a Woman (192930, Tate).


[pic]

Ida Kar (19081974), Barbara Hepworth at Work on the Armature of a
Sculpture, 1961
Vintage bromide print, 202 x 252 mm
National Portrait Gallery, London (NPG x88513)
 National Portrait Gallery, London


The couple later separated and Hepworth partnered with the painter Ben
Nicholson, with whom she had triplets and who introduced her to Christian
Science (they had triplets in 1934, married in 1938, and separated in
1951). Nicholson moved into Hepworths home atThey lived at 7 The Mall, in
Hampstead, where a community of modernist artists was formingformed,
including Henry and Irina Moore, the art writer and poet Herbert Read, the
Russian constructivist sculptor Naum Gabo and, later, the Dutch abstract
painter Piet Mondrian. They also visited France together over the decade
where they met artists including Brancusi, Braque, Calder, Kandinsky,
Mondrian and Picasso. A major breakthrough came in 1932 when Hepworth first
pierced the block, in Pierced Form (1932, destroyed). She also began
creating multi-part abstract sculptures at this time, sometimes with
incised figurative marks, as in Two Forms (1933, Tate). Hepworth and
Nicholson demonstrated their commitment to abstraction in joint exhibitions
in 193233 and also collaborated with others on the publication Circle:
International Survey of Constructive Art (1937). Left-wing in her political
views, Hepworth also contributed to Artists International Association
exhibitions and designed a Monument to the Spanish Civil War (193839,
destroyed).

[pic]
Barbara Hepworth (19031975), Two Forms, 1933
Alabaster on limestone base, 260 x 296 x 176 mm
Tate (T07123)
 Bowness, Hepworth Estate. Photo  Tate

Hepworth and Nicholson first visited France together in 1933 and over that
the decade met artists including Constantin Brancusi, Georges Braque,
Alexander Calder, Wassily Kandinsky, Joan Mir, Mondrian and, Pablo Picasso
and Sophie Taeuber-Arp and. They were also invited by Auguste Herbin and
Jean Hlion to become members ofjoin the Parisian group Abstraction-
Cration in 1933. In London they were members of the 7 & 5 Society
(193235) and Unit One (193334), contributed to the international
exhibition Abstract and Concrete (1936) and edited and designed the
publication Circle: International Survey of Constructive Art (1937). Left-
wing in her political views, Hepworth also contributed to the Artists
International Association (AIA) exhibitions Artists against War and Fascism
(1935) and Unity of Artists for Peace, Democracy and Cultural Development
(1937) and designed a Monument to the Spanish Civil War (193839,
destroyed).

Just before the outbreak of war, Hepworth and her family moved to Cornwall
at the invitation of the writer Adrian Stokes (Gabo also joined them,
working closely alongside Hepworth in 193946). Hepworth began to introduce
colour and stringing into her work at this time and was also influenced by
the Cornish landscape, as in Wave (194344, National Galleries of Scotland,
Edinburgh) and Pelagos (1946, Tate). In 1943, Hepworths first
retrospective exhibition was held at Temple Newsam, in Leeds. In 194749,
she made a series of around seventy figurative drawings in hospitals, at
the invitation of her friend, the surgeon Norman Capener.

Living initially in Carbis Bay, Hepworth acquired Trewyn Studio in St Ives
in 1949, where she lived and worked until her death in 1975. Now with more
space and able to work outside, Hepworth could sculpt on a larger scale.
She was commissioned by the Arts Council to carve Contrapuntal Forms,
standing at over three metres in height, for the 1951 Festival of Britain
(it was later sited in the new town of Harlow in 1953). For the first time,
Hepworth employed assistants, which increased her productivity over the
coming decades, and who would include Terry Frost, John Milne, Denis
Mitchell and John Wells. With some of these artists, Hepworth was also a
founder member of the Penwith Society of Arts in 1949.

The musical title of Contrapuntal Forms reflects Hepworths new friendship
with the South African composer Priaulx Rainier, who also helped to shape
the subtropical garden at Trewyn and composed music for the first film on
Hepworth, Figures in a Landscape: Cornwall and the Sculpture of Barbara
Hepworth (Dudley Shaw Ashton, 1953). With Rainier and the composer Michael
Tippett, Hepworth organised the St Ives Festival of Music and the Arts in
1953. Tippett later asked Hepworth to design the sets and costumes for his
first opera, The Midsummer Marriage, which premiered at the Royal Opera
House in 1955.

Hepworth had also designed the sets and costumes for Michel Saint-Deniss
1951 production of Sophocles Electra starring Peggy Ashcroft at the Old
Vic, including creating the steel rod sculpture Apollo (Tate). As well as
continuing with carving stone and wood, iIn the 1950s Hepworth also began
to experiment with using sheet metal, as in Forms in Movement (Galliard)
(1956, Wairarapa Museum of Art, Aratoi, New Zealand) and Orpheus (Maquette
2) (Version II) (1956, edition 1959, Tate), as well as creating organic,
flowing shapes in plaster over aluminium armatures cast in bronze, as in
Sea Form (Porthmeor) (1958, Tate). Quicker to sculpt than wood or stone,
these new materials also allowed Hepworth to respond to the increasing
demand for her work, both in Britain and abroad.

[pic]
Barbara Hepworth (19031975), Orpheus (Maquette 2) (Version II), 1956,
edition 1959
Copper and cotton string on wooden base, 1149 x 432 x 415 mm
Tate (T00955)
 Bowness, Hepworth Estate. Photo  Tate

In 1961 Hepworth acquired a former Palais de Danse, opposite Trewyn Studio,
where she worked on large-scale public commissions on a monumental scale,
including Winged Figure (196162, John Lewis, London) and Single Form
(196164, United Nations, New York). A BBC documentary made by John Read,
first broadcast in 1961, shows Hepworth at work in her studios, with , the
sculptures placed in Trewyn garden and in the Palais, and emphasises the
influence of the Cornish landscape. The words Hepworth speaks in this
documentary were adapted for her Pictorial Autobiography, (first published
in 1970). Towards the end of her life, Hepworth created some complex, multi-
part sculptures, as in The Family of Man (1970), Conversation with Magic
Stones(1973, Tate) and Fallen Images (197475, Tate).

Hepworth died in a fire in her first-floor studio at Trewyn on 20 May 1975.
In accordance with her wishes, Hepworths executors established the Barbara
Hepworth Museum and Sculpture Garden at Trewyn, which opened in 1976. The
museum has been popular since its opening and has been managed by Tate
since 1980. In 2011, a newly built gallery, The Hepworth Wakefield, opened
in the sculptors hometown with a significant donation of 44 full-size
working models from the Hepworth Estate.

Helena Bonett
August 2013February 2014

References and further reading
List of works

Hepworth, B. and Read, H. (1952), Barbara Hepworth: Carvings and Drawings,
London: Lund Humphries

Hodin, J.P. and Bowness, A. (1961),Barbara Hepworth, London: Lund
Humphries

Hepworth, B. (1970, revised 1978, republished 1985),A Pictorial
Autobiography, London: Tate Publishing

Bowness, A. (1971), The Complete Sculpture of Barbara Hepworth 196069,
London: Lund Humphries

Thistlewood, D. (ed.) (1996), Barbara Hepworth Reconsidered,Liverpool:
Liverpool University Press and Tate Gallery Liverpool

Curtis, P. (1998), Barbara Hepworth, London: Tate Publishing

Gale, M. and Stephens,C. (1999), Barbara Hepworth: Works in the Tate
Gallery Collection and the Barbara Hepworth Museum, St Ives,London: Tate
Publishing (entries available online
http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artists/dame-barbara-hepworth-1274)


Bowness, S. (2008), Barbara Hepworth, http://barbarahepworth.org.uk

References and further reading

Hammacher,A.M. (1968, revised 1987),Barbara Hepworth, London: Thames and
Hudson

Hepworth, B. (1970, revised 1978, republished 1985),A Pictorial
Autobiography, London: Tate Publishing

Curtis, P. and Wilkinson, A.G. (1994), Barbara Hepworth: A Retrospective,
Liverpool: Tate Gallery Liverpool

Thistlewood, D. (ed.) (1996), Barbara Hepworth Reconsidered,Liverpool:
Liverpool University Press and Tate Gallery Liverpool

Curtis, P. (1998), Barbara Hepworth, London: Tate Publishing

Bowness, S. (ed.) (2011), Barbara Hepworth: The Plasters, Farnham, Surrey
and Burlington,VT: Lund Humphries


