
Patrick Heron, Patrick, CBE (1920  1999)

Patrick Heron is recognised by many as a key figure in the hHistory of post
war British art, both as a practising artist and as a prolific writer and
critic. Influenced in his own work by artists such as Matisse, Bonnard and
Braque, he acted as key conduit between British art and the continent;
particularly French painting, typified by the cole de Paris.

Like his fellow British painters Roger Hilton and William Gear, he was
predisposed toward the bold use of colour and a free play with oscillating
perspectival cues in the more figurative of his works. An example of
Heron's earlier linear lyrical abstract work, Christmas Eve, was included
in the 1951 Festival of Britain exhibition, 60 Paintings for '51. Heron
also organised several key exhibitions during the 1950s, which marked key
touchstones in the development of abstract British art, including the Space
in Colour at the Hanover Gallery, London, in 1953 and Metavisual,
Taschiste, Abstract at the Redfern Gallery, London, in April 1956.
Influenced by the Russian-French artist Nicholas de Stal, and perhaps
somewhat by American Aabstract Eexpressionism, after 1955 his works were
primarily non representational, but preserved subtle and equivocal
references to the landscape surrounding his home.

Patrick Heron was born in Headingley, Leeds in Yorkshire in 1920, the first
of four children born to Eulalie 'Jack' Heron (ne Davies) and Thomas
Milner Heron. His father was the founder of the Cresta Silks Company,
established in Welwyn Garden City, where Heron met his future wife Delia
(nee Reiss). Prior to this, the family had lived for several years in
Cornwall in the 1920s.  As a conscientious objector during the war, Heron
worked as a farm labourer between 1940  43 before returning to Cornwall to
work at Bernard Leach's pottery studio between 1944  1945., Dduring
whichthis time he first befriended members of the local artistic community
including Ben Nicholson and Barbara Hepworth.

Heron later identified Matisse's Red Studio as 'the most influential single
painting in my entire career' (Heron, 1978)[1] . Whilst his enduring
penchant for marriages of vibrant colour owed much to Matisse, the
interwoven, linear denotation of his early forms was greatly indebted to
Braque, whose works Heron viewed first at the Tate Gallery in 1946 and at
the artist's studio whilst exhibiting at the 1949 Salon de Mai in Paris.[2]


Heron enjoyed numerous trips to Italy and France, both in the capacity of
critic for the New English Weekly and, later, the New Statesman and Nation
(between 1947 -50) and as an exhibiting artist, with each visit gathering
information and furthering his interest in the work of French contemporary
painters.

In the summer of 1952, influenced by Nicholas de Stal, Heron dispensed
with the networks of linear markings and began to experiment in paint with
simpler blocks of colour. He moved to Cornwall permanently in 1955 and, as
welcoming hosts at their house -, the Eagle's Nest at Zennor -, he and
Delia introduced other artists (including Roger Hilton and Sandra Blow) to
the Cornish artistic community. Heron rented Ben Nicholson's old studio at
Porthmeor beach,  at St Ives, and, in the period following his permanent
move to Cornwall, his works became increasingly abstract. Two series of his
works from this period -; the Stripe paintings and Garden paintings, such
as Azalea Garden, May 1956 -, demonstrate Heron's deft deployment of
luminous tasches and bands of colour. In the remainder of the work he would
produce, Heron had arrived at the realisation that, for him, colour, was
the 'utterly indispensable means' of realising pictorial space. Though,
even in these seemingly non- representational works, there remained the
trace of his visual perception, particularly of Cornwall:; it's landscape,
its light and his home.[3]

Heron was awarded the Grand Prize at the second annual John Moores
Exhibition in 1959, was made CBE in 1977 and sat as a trustee of the Tate
Gallery between 1980  87. Three retrospective exhibitions of his work were
staged during his lifetime:; at the Whitechapel Art Gallery in 1972,;
Barbican Art Gallery in 1985 and the Tate Gallery in 1998.

References and further reading

Gayford, M. and Sylvester, D. (eds.) (1998), Patrick Heron, exh. Cat., Tate
Gallery:, London, 1998.

Gooding, M. (1995), Patrick Heron, Phaidon:, London.

Gooding, M. (ed.), (1998) Painter as Critic - Patrick Heron: Selected
Writings, Tate Publishing:, London, 1998.

Heron, P. (1953), 'Space in Colour', introduction to exh. Cat., Hanover
Gallery, London, Jul  Aug 1953.


Knight, V., (1985) 'The Pursuit of Colour' in Patrick Heron, exh. cat.,
Barbican Art Gallery, London, 1985: , pp. 5-12.

McNay, M. (2002) , Patrick Heron, London:Tate Publishing, London., 2002



Suggested images:
List of works
1. Christmas Eve, 1951
2. Azalea Garden, May 1956, Tate Gallery London

-----------------------
[1]    Patrick Heron, 'Art is Autonomous', in The Colour of Colour, E
William Doty Lectures in Fine Arts, University of Texas, 1978, pp. 41-59
[2]    See Knight, V., Patrick Heron, exh. cat., Barbican Art Gallery,
London, 1985
[3]   Heron, P., 'Space in Colour', introduction to exh. Cat., Hanover
Gallery, London, July  August 1953

