


Arleen Pancza Graham
515 Queen Anne Road
Teaneck, N.J. 07666
panczagraham@fordham.edu


Hopper, Edward (1882-1967)                         Work Count:      529

Edward Hopper was known for his realist paintings of American life in the
decades from the 1930s through the early 1960s.  Born in Nyack, New York,
just across the Hudson River, north of Manhattan, the family was successful
and solidly middle class. Although his parents supported his study of art
after his 1899 high school graduation, their conservative viewpoints
informed his efforts.  They encouraged him to seek a career in commercial
art so that he would have a reliable income.  He enrolled in the
Correspondence School of Illustration in New York City, supporting himself
as an illustrator until 1925 and creating over five hundred works.  From
1900 until 1906 he studied at the New York School of Art with Robert Henri,
whose admiration for European artists inspired Hopper to travel abroad,
which he did three times during his early career (1906, 1909, 1910). Hopper
also studied with William Merritt Chase, and Kenneth Hayes Miller, and was
determined to succeed as a fine rather than commercial artist.  It was in
these classes that he met friends like Rockwell Kent, Guy Pne du Bois,
Reginald Marsh and Stuart Davis, who would become important figures in the
art world of the time, as well as his future wife, Josephine Nivison, whom
he married in 1924.  It was during these early years that Hopper began to
exhibit at the Whitney Studio Club in New York, the precursor to the
Whitney Museum of American Art.  In 1920, Hopper had his first one person
exhibition there and it foreshadowed his future relationship with that
institution.

After his first trip to Gloucester, Massachusetts in 1912, Hopper
introduced seaside themes into his work, often rendered in watercolor.
Lighthouses, sailing scenes and landscapes reflect his travels to art
colonies at Ogunquit and Monhegan Island, Maine and Cape Cod, where he
built a summer home in 1934 and summered there until his death. Unlike
printmaking, which he also practiced, watercolor was easily transported,
ideal for plein air work and, with its emphasis on maintaining the bright
white of the paper, was well suited for depicting Hoppers interest in
sunlight. By 1930, Hoppers reputation was secured by the Whitney Museums
purchase of his oil painting, Early Sunday Morning (1930) and the gift of
House by the Railroad (1925) to the Museum of Modern Art, the first oil to
enter the Museums permanent collection.  Both of these paintings
underscore Hoppers enduring interest in architectural structure and a
quiet sense of isolation that permeates much of his mature work.  The 1942
purchase of his iconic painting, Nighthawks (1942), by The Art Institute of
Chicago, further reinforced his stature. After his death, Hoppers wife,
Jo, bequeathed his estate of more than three thousand works to the Whitney
Museum of American Art in New York, a fitting expression of gratitude for
its early support.

References and further reading

Goodrich, L. (1971) Edward Hopper (New York: H. N. Abrams).

Levin, G. (1995)  Edward Hopper: A Catalogue Raisonne. (New York: Norton).

----- (1995) Edward Hopper: An Intimate Biography. (New York: Alfred A.
Knopf).

Mecklenburg, V. M. (1999) Edward Hopper: The Watercolors (New York:
Norton).

Museum of Fine Arts, Boston (2007) Edward Hopper.  (Boston: MFA
Publication).


[pic]

Edward Hopper, Early Sunday Morning, 1930, oil on canvas, Whitney Museum of
American Art, Ne w York, purchased with funds from Gertrude Vanderbilt
Whitney.
http://whitney.org/Collection/EdwardHopper/31426 [pic]

Edward Hopper, Light At Two Lights, 1927.  Watercolor and graphite on
paper, Whitney Museum of American Art, New York, Josephine N. Hopper
Bequest.
http://whitney.org/Collection/EdwardHopper/701094



