
Alla G. Vronskaya
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
State Institute for Art Studies, Moscow


Chernikhov, Iakov (1889-1951)

















Iakov Chernikhov
http://www.icif.ru/about.htm

Iakov Georgievich Chernikhov was born in Pavlograd, Yekaterinenskav
Gubernia of the Russian Empire (today Dnepropetrovskaya Oblast, Ukraine)
in an impoverished petty bourgeois Jewish family. Having demonstrated an
artistic talent already in his childhood, as a teenager Chernikhov worked
as an apprentice in a photography workshop and (after running away from
home, where his desire to become an artist found little support) studied in
Odessa Art School (Odesskoe Khudozhestvennoe Uchilishche) in 1906-14. After
graduating from the School, Chernikhov entered the Academy of Arts in St.
Petersburg, from which he received a diploma in architecture in 1925.
Chernikhovs training as both an artist and an architect determined his
idiosyncratic approach to architectural form and his particular interest in
the aspects of its representation.

Since his years in Odessa Art School, Chernikhov had been interested in
drafting techniques and, in particular, in the geometric construction of
ornament. Already in 1915, under the influence of modernist art movements,
Chernikhov decided to create a new ornament, devoid of symmetry and
repetitive rhythm. During the next several years, Chernikhov developed
these ideas into a novel art form, exprimatics (from the French exprimer,
to express), which expressed abstract ideas in geometric forms. In 1918-24,
he supplemented exprimatics with aristography (from the Greek aristo, the
most beautiful), which suggested a way of intensifying spatial compositions
through colour. If Chernikhovs early work was predominantly abstract, in
the early 1930s he applied the fundamental premises of exprimatics and
aristography to architectural drawing. Published as a series of colourfully
illustrated books, these drawings merged painterly (EXPRESSIONISM, CUBISM,
SUPREMATISM) and architectural (axonometry, architectural plan conventions)
techniques of representation in order to create fanciful images of utopian
cities, factories, machines, and abstract geometric forms and their
combinations. Chernikhovs later graphic cycles produced in the late 1930s
and 1940s responded to the historicist turn in Soviet architecture,
rejecting modernist graphic minimalism in favour of Piranesi-inspired,
quasi-Surrealist dreamy landscapes.

Although today Chernikhov is mostly remembered as an author of utopian
drawings, he led a prolific architectural practice.  Between 1926 and 1941
he was involved in design and construction of several dozens of buildings,
predominantly industrial (chemical and metallurgical factories) and
residential ones. His best-known work is the water tower of a rope-making
workshop of the Krasnyi Gvozdilshchik (The Red Nailer) factory (1930-31)
in Leningrad. Well-paid, Chernikhovs architectural commissions allowed the
architect to publish his drawings in colour (an exceptional fact
considering the scarcity of Soviet printing resources) and even to finance
his own Scientific-Research Laboratory of Architectural Forms and Methods
of Graphics in Leningrad (1927-34). Moreover, throughout his career,
Chernikhov remained active as a pedagogue, teaching at the Leningrad
Institute of Transportation Engineers (1928-45) and several industrial and
transportation higher educational institutions in Moscow.

Publications:

Iskusstvo nachertaniia [The art of drafting]. Leningrad: Izd-vo Akademii
khudozhestv, 1927.

Ornament: kompozitsionno-klassicheskie postroeniia [Ornament: compositional-
classical designs]. Leningrad: Izd. avtora, 1930.

Osnovy sovremennoi arkhitektury: eksperimentalno-issledovatelskie raboty
[Fundamentals of modern Architecture: experimental-research works].
Leningrad : Izd. Leningradskogo ob-va arkhitektorov, 1930.

Konstruktsii arkhitekturnykh i mashinnykh form [Construction of
Architectural and Machine Forms], [Leningrad] : Izd. Leningradskogo ob-va
arkhitektorov, 1931.

Arkhitekturnye fantazii. 101 Kompozitsia  [Architectural Fantasies. 101
Compositions], Leningrad : Izd. Leningradskogo obl. otd-niia Vses.
obedineniia "Mezhdunarodnaia kniga", 1933.



Selected graphic cycles:

Ornament, 1915-27

Exprimatics, 1915-1920s

Aristography, 1914-27

Architecture of Industry, 1932-36

Architectural Fairy Tales, 1927-34

Architectural Ensembles, 1937-43

The Palaces of Communism (1934-41)

The Pantheons of the Great Patriotic War (1942-45)



Selected Works:

Water tower, Krasnyi Gvozdilshchik [The Red Nailer] factory (1930-31,
Leningrad).

Rope-making and steel-wire workshops, Krasnyi Gvozdilshchik factory, (1930-
31, Leningrad).

Neva chemical factory (1930-34, Leningrad).

Perm bichromate factory (1934, Perm).



References and Further Reading

Cooke, C. (ed.) (1989) Fantasy and Construction - Iakov Chernikhov in
Architectural Design, vol. 59, no. 78, London.

Olmo, C. and de Magistris, A. (1995) Jakov Cernihov: documenti e
riproduzioni dall'archivio di Aleksej e Dimitri Cernihov. Torino: Umberto
Allemandi,

Chernikhov, I. (2011) Moi tvorcheskii put, Moscow: Russkii Avangard.



Visual Material:

[pic]
Aristography, 1914-27.
http://www.icif.ru/cyc/aristo/pages/aristo-fond-73.htm
[pic]
The Fundamentals of Contemporary Architecture, 1925-30.
http://www.icif.ru/cyc/oca/pages/OCA-116fond.htm

[pic]
Architectural fantasies, 1925-33.
http://www.icif.ru/cyc/101/pages/32.htm

[pic]
The Palaces of Communism, 1934-41
http://www.icif.ru/cyc/dvor/pages/dv-017.htm

[pic]
Water-tower of Krasnyi Gvozdilshchik (The Red Nailer) factory (1930-31).
http://www.panoramio.com/photo/60389957


