
Jancs, Mikls

Dan Humphrey (Texas A & M University)

Hungarian director Mikls Jancs  (September 27, 1921-January 31, 2014)
emerged in the 1960s with a series of films professing both an unapologetic
Marxist perspective and a sub-textually resonant critique of Soviet-style
totalitarianism.  His earliest films exhibited a palatable, even popular
form of socialist realism, but his work departed from realist models after
1968; he developed a style involving extremely long takes (one of his
features is comprised of only twelve shots), intricately choreographed
crowd scenes, and pageant-like parables that at times depart notably from
the confines of reality:  In Mg kr a np (1972) (Red Psalm) characters
killed on screen are casually resurrected; in Szerelmem, Elektra (1974)
(Electra, My Love) an anachronistic helicopter arrives in the final shot to
carry its ancient Greek protagonists away to their destiny; and in any
number of films, actors (often naked) and animals (usually horses) move in
relation to each other in ballet-like synchronicity across vast outdoor
plains.

Jancss late-career featuresvulgar, lowbrow comedies largely unseen
outside the directors homelandare wholly different.  While widely popular
in Hungary, they nevertheless contain trenchant political allegories
offered in a national-popular style and merit attention.  Although his most
distinctive work has often been derided as a cinematic dead-end (Canby)
by North American critics, many great filmmakers (Andrei Tarkovski,  Bla
Tarr, Andrei Sokurov) and a number of major films (Novecento (1976) (1900)
and Heavens Gate (1980), for example), are indebted to this artist.

References and further reading:

      Bachmann, G. (1974) Jancso Plain, Monthly Film Bulletin 43 (4): 217-
      221. (Account of Jancss working methods during the shooting of
      Szerelmem, Elektra.)

      Canby, V. (1977) Bunuels Triumph, Bertoluccis Flop, New York Times
      October 16: 91. (This film festival overview contains an
      acknowledgement of the influence of Jancss work on Bernardo
      Bertolucci by a major New York critic who did not appreciate either.)

      Cunningham, J. (2004) Hungarian Cinema: From Coffee House to
      Multiplex, London: Wallflower. (Overview of Hungarian national cinema
      puts Jancss film in their context of origin.)

      Images of Power and the Power of Images: the Films of Mikls Jancs
      (2003), Kinoeye: New Perspectives on European Film 3 (3 and 4).
      kinoeye.org/index_03_03.php, and kinoeye.org/index_03_04.php. (Double
      issue of online journal devoted to Jancss career, with articles
      covering much of the directors lesser known work.)

      Petrie, G. (1998) Red Psalm, Trowbridge, UK: Flicks Books. (Focused on
      a single paradigmatic Jancs film, this book nonetheless offers a
      helpful, readable overview of the directors concerns.)

      Petrie, G. (1981) Somewhere in Europe: Mikls Jancs, History Must
      Answer to Man: The Contemporary Hungarian Cinema (2nd ed.), Budapest:
      Corvina Kiad, 20-105. (Authoritative and readable brief survey of
      Jancss first twenty years as a filmmaker.)

Paratexual material supplied

      The Confrontation frame grab should belong to Second Run, UK.
      The Lords Lantern in Budapest frame grab should belong to Budapest
      Film.
      Public Vices, Private Pleasures frame grab rights should belong to
      First Line Films.
      Red Psalm and The Way Home frame grabs should belong to Mafilm,
      Hungary.



Select Filmography:

      Olds s kts[Cantata] (1963)
      gy jttem [The Way Home] (1965)
      Szegnylegnyek[The Round-Up] (1966)
      Csillagosok, katonk [The Red and the White] (1967)
      Csend s kilts [Silence and Cry] (1968)
      Fnyes szelek [The Confrontation] (1969)
      La pacifista [The Pacifist] (1970)
      Mg kr a np [Red Psalm] (1972)
      Szerelmem, Elektra [Electra, My Love] (1974)
      Vizi privati, pubbliche virt [Private Vices, Public Pleasures] (1976)
      Magyar rapszdia [Hungarian Rhapsody] (1979)
      A zsarnok szve, avagy Boccaccio Magyarorszgon [The Tyrants Heart]
      (1981)
      Szrnyek vadja [Season of Monsters] (1987)
      Jzus Krisztus horoszkpja [Jesus Christs Horoscope] (1989)
      Kvek zenete  Budapest [Message of Stone  Budapest] (1994)
      Nekem lmpst adott kezembe az r, Pesten [The Lords Lantern in
      Budapest] (1999)
      Anyd! A sznyogok (2000)
      Kelj fel, komm, ne aludjl [Wake Up, Mate, Dont You Sleep!] (2002)
      Ede megev ebdem (2006)



