
Jazz
Dustin Garlitz

JAZZ is a leading music of modernism.  As an art form, it rests heavily on
improvisation.  JAZZ employs a multitude of rhythms, harmonies, and melodic
motifs.  Early modern JAZZ includes the JAZZ AGE of the 1920s, Swing and
Big Band music from the 1930s.  High modern JAZZ styles include, bebop,
cool, AVANT-GARDE, free, modal, Afro-Cuban, hard-bop, and post-bop,
spanning the 1940s (bebop) to the 1960s (AVANT-GARDE) in its trajectory.
In the early modern JAZZ of the 1920s and its JAZZ AGE, musicians and
composers such as DUKE ELLINGTON began making significant contributions to
the music at nightclubs in NEW YORK CITY such as the Cotton Club in HARLEM.
 ELLINGTONs contributions are noted among the HARLEM REINANCE.  Giddins
and DeVeaux (2009) claim that the most commonly performed composer in JAZZ
is DUKE ELLINGTON, who wrote over 1000 compositions in the course of his
career.  THELONIOUS MONK is attributed as the second most performed
composer, with approximately the 70 original compositions the jazz pianist
wrote in his career.
Notable JAZZ musicians of modernism include DUKE ELLINGTON (1899-1974),
THELONIOUS MONK (1917-1982), DIZZY GILLESPIE (1917-1993), CHARLIE PARKER
(1920-1955), CHARLES MINGUS (1922-1979), MILES DAVIS (1926-1991), JOHN
COLTRANE (1926-1967), ORNETTE COLEMAN (1930-), and JOHN ZORN (1953-).

      The origins of JAZZ lie in the late 19th Century and early 20th
century African American experience.  JAZZ culture started in New Orleans,
and moved to locations in the U.S. such as Kansas City, Chicago, and NEW
YORK CITY.  NEW YORK CITY has been considered the center of the JAZZ world
for many years, from approximately the early to mid twentieth century to
date.  In addition to HARLEM, GREENWICH VILLAGE has been a noted NEW YORK
CITY neighborhood for JAZZ in its history, with musicians THELONIOUS MONK
and JOHN COLTRANE performing modern JAZZ there at the Five Spot Caf in
1957, CHARLES MINGUS at the Caf Bohemia in 1955, ORNETTE COLEMAN at the
Five Spot Caf in 1959 and JOHN COLTRANE at the Village Vanguard in 1961.

      DIZZY GILLESPIE became a cultural ambassador of JAZZ, representing the
music of the Americas by performing his Afro-Cuban JAZZ and bebop that he
founded with others.  His international tours were supported by the U.S.
Department of State.  DUKE ELLINGTON toured Soviet Russia during the Cold
War, also diplomatically promoting JAZZ as American foreign policy.  In
fact, both ELLINGTON and GILLESPIE played a role in the U.S.s jazz
diplomacy commenced in the Soviet Union and other regions of the world from
1954 to 1968, in which JAZZ represented a device to practice global
diplomacy in a manner that reshaped democracys image worldwide.

      Many notable jazz musicians have expressed social, cultural, and
political views via their music.  Bassist CHARLES MINGUS composed and
recorded Fables of Faubus, released on his modern JAZZ album Mingus Ah Um
(1959), which he wrote in protest of Arkansass segregationist Governor
Orval Faubus, who had attempted to prevent the court-ordered desegregation
of Little Rock Central High School in 1957.  MINGUSS composition
Meditations on Integration, was performed internationally at a renowned
Paris Concert in 1964, and AVANT-GARDE jazz instrumentalist Eric Dolphy was
a band member featured there.  JOHN COLTRANEs JAZZ composition titled
Alabama was written as a response to a Ku Klux Klan bombing of a Baptist
church in Birmingham in 1963, which cost the lives of four girls.  COLTRANE
performed the composition during a live recording of an AVANT-GARDE album
at the famed Birdland Jazz Club in NEW YORK CITY.  In 1961, COLTRANE wrote
the composition Song of the Underground Railroad for his Africa/Brass
recording sessions, which also reflected a social engagement with African
American history and the Civil Rights movement.  DUKE ELLINGTON had
composed the jazz symphony Black, Brown, and Beige, which premiered at
Carnegie Hall in the 1940s, with the same type of social conscience.

      LeRoi Jones (Amiri Baraka) wrote about alto saxophonist and bebop
progenitor CHARLIE PARKER in his work Dutchman (1964) and AVANT-GARDE tenor
saxophonist JOHN COLTRANE in his musical and cultural criticism, including
COLTRANEs performance on the album My Favorite Things (1961).  JACK
KEROUAC and ALLEN GINSBERG were also enthused by JAZZ, mainly bebop.
French existentialist philosopher JEAN-PAUL SARTRE was found sitting at
Cafes in Pariss Left Bank in intellectual and aesthetic dialogue with
MILES DAVIS, when the trumpeter traveled to that city for the first
international JAZZ festival there in 1949.  Cool JAZZ was popular in cities
such as Los Angeles in the 1940s and 1950s, and especially with DAVIS, but
modal jazz soon emerged with DAVISs output in the second half of the
1950s, most notably his album Kind of Blue (1959), featuring tenor
saxophonist JOHN COLTRANE.  The tenor saxophonist performed at cultural
institutions such as New York Citys Museum of Modern Art (an establishment
that continues to present jazz concerts today), and spent time reading
books such as French philosopher, sociologist and political thinker
Raymond Arons The Opium of the Intellectuals (1955), which in part
influenced his AVANT-GARDE musical liberation of the JAZZ establishment in
the 1960s, alongside ORNETTE COLEMANs work.  FRANKFURT SCHOOL philosopher
THEODOR W. ADORNO was critical of JAZZ, writing JAZZ critiques in Germany
including Farewell to Jazz, (1933) On Jazz, (1936) and Perennial
Fashion-Jazz, from the 1940s, as well his negative remarks on JAZZ from
his American exile in New York City and Los Angeles in the chapter The
Culture Industry: Enlightenment as Mass Deception, from Dialectic of
Enlightenment (1944), which he co-authored with his FRANKFURT SCHOOL
colleague MAX HORKHEIMER.  In the visual arts, ROBERT RAUSCHENBERG created
an art work titled for THELONIOUS MONK.  French artist HENRI MATISSEs
works titled Jazz (1947) celebrated the musical genre that was
characterized by its spontaneity and improvisatory disposition.

      After the JAZZ AGE of the 1920s, which was represented in writers
works such as F. Scott Fitzgeralds Tales from the Jazz Age (1922), Swing
Jazz and Big-Bands became popular in the 1930s, still in the early modern
phase of jazzs trajectory.  Then came the bebop revolution of the 1940s
with CHARLIE PARKER and DIZZY GILLESPIE, the first fully modern style of
jazz, which resulted in the performance and recording of music that rested
heavily on improvisation in small group settings.  By the end of the 1950s,
the avant-garde movement had emerged, and rose to the forefront of jazz in
the 1960s with the triumph of musicians such as JOHN COLTRANE and ORNETTE
COLEMAN.  AVANT-GARDE JAZZ rested even more so on improvisation, in cases
like free jazz, entirely on improvisation in collective settings of small
groups and in some cases, large ensembles.  Harmonically, the music was
much more loosely structured, and was liberated from standard chord
progressions for improvisators to develop themes of their own that were
abstract, intricate, or singular in some cases.  In other cases, AVANT-
GARDE and free jazz improvisers sonically transcended the very notion of
the thematic itself.

      ORNETTE COLEMANs album Free Jazz (1961) features a print of a
painting by artist JACKSON POLLLOCK in its album art.  COLEMAN composed
music for the film adaptation of WILLIAM S. BORROUGHS novel Naked Lunch
(1991).  The beats had been attracted to bebop, post-bop, and early AVANT-
GARDE JAZZ performed at GREENWICH VILLAGE establishments in the 1950s, with
the music there inspiring many writers, poets, and artists.  This had been
the case with DUKE ELLINGTON in HARLEM as early as the JAZZ AGE of the
1920s and the HARLEM RENAISSANCE from writers LANGSTON HUGHES to RALPH
ELLISON and ZORA NEALE HURSTON.  Playwright Edward Albees The Death of
Bessie Smith (1959) showed the influence of JAZZ and blues-centered music
from the 1920s and 1930s on the 20th century humanities in American culture
and beyond, as Albees play originally premiered in the Berlin theatre.


      Musicians of MODERNISM outside of the JAZZ tradition have collaborated
with JAZZ musicians from time to time.  An example of such is RICHARD
TEITELBAUMs recorded work with AVANT-GARDE JAZZ drummer Andew Cyrille.
PAULINE OLIVEROS has performed with AVANT-GARDE JAZZ improvisers on New
Yorks Downtown Music scene.  One musical style of AVANT-GARDE JAZZ is free
improvisation, and alto saxophonist JOHN ZORN has worked with sound artists
such as Christian Marclay on those aesthetic terms.  ZORN has also
incorporated Jewish influences into his AVANT-GARDE jazz, which reflects
his long term artistic engagement with Radical Jewish Culture.

References and Further Readings:

Adorno, T.W. (1983) Perennial Fashion-Jazz, in Prisms, (trans.) S. Weber
and S. Weber, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.

______ (2002) On Jazz, Farewell to Jazz, in Essays on Music, (ed.),
R.D. Leppert, (trans.), S.H. Gillespie et al., Los Angeles and Berkeley,
CA: University of California Press.

Appel, A., Jr. (2002) Jazz Modernism: From Ellington and Armstrong to
Matisse and Joyce, New York: Alfred K. Knopf.

DeVeaux, S. (1997) The Birth of Bebop: A Social and Musical History,
Berkeley and Los Angeles, CA: University of California Press.

Giddins, G. and S. DeVeaux (2009) Jazz, New York and London: W.W. Norton.

Gioia, T. (1997) The History of Jazz, New York and Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

Jost, E. (1994) Free Jazz, New York: Da Capo Press.

Myers, M. (2012) Why Jazz Happened, Berkeley and Los Angeles, CA:
University of California Press.

OMeally, R.G., B.H. Edwards, F.J. Griffin, (eds.), (2004) Uptown
Conversation: The New Jazz Studies, New York: Columbia University Press.

Schuller, G. (1991) The Swing Era: The Development of Jazz, 1930-1945, New
York and Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Shaw, A. (1987) The Jazz Age: Popular Music in the 1920s, New York and
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Shipton, A. (2001) A New History of Jazz, London and New York: Continuum.

Whitehead, K. (2011) Why Jazz?: A Concise Guide, New York: Oxford
University Press.

Dustin Garlitz
University of South Florida
