
Bohumil Kubita (August 21, 1884, Vlkovice by Hradec Krlov  November
27, 1918, Prague)

The Czech avant-garde artist Bohumil Kubita came from a rural farming
family. Educated in Hradec Krlov, Kubita moved to Prague in 1903 to
attended art school, first at the School for Applied Art (1903-1904) and
then at the Academy of Fine Art (1904-1905). After a year of service in
1905 with the Austrian imperial navy in Pula he studied at the Institute of
Fine Art in Florence (1906-1907). Upon his return to Prague he contributed
to the first exhibition of Osma (The Eight, spring 1907) before returning
to military duty in Pula. In summer 1908 he participated in Osmas second
and final exhibition. As a founding member of Osma, Kubita shared the
pursuit of Expressionist representation of the psyche through non-local
color and idiosyncratic form. Early impact of the art of Auguste Rodin and
Edvard Munch exhibited in Prague in 1902 and 1905, respectively, was
augmented in 1907 by Kubitas visits to exhibitions of Symbolists, Post-
Impressionists, and the Fauves in Vienna, alongside his study of color
theory and optics back in Prague.

With financial support from his uncle, Kubita spent April to June, 1909,
in Paris where he wrote reviews of exhibitions of Emil Bernard and Claude
Monet for Czech cultural magazines and visited exhibitions of Fauve and
Post-Impressionist works. In summer 1909 he conducted military service
before returning to Bohemia. Kubita returned to Paris a second time
(December 1909  June 1910) and was introduced to the Cubist work of
Picasso. He visited countless exhibitions, sketched street life and working-
class entertainment venues, and studied paintings by El Greco, Nicolas
Poussin, and Mesopotamian and Egyptian sculpture in the Louvre. Back in
Prague he had access to Vincenc Kramas collection of Old Masters and
avant-garde art, which included analytic Cubist pieces by Picasso and
Braque. In 1910 Kubita began interlacing Cubism and Expressionism,
resulting in a synthesis that informs his mature work of the years 1911-
1918. These paintings, drawings, and prints epitomize the
characteristically Czech concern with the spiritual content of subjects
emphasized through the fragmented planes of Cubism and psychological
intensity of Expressionist color and compositional structure. Kubita
participated in organizational meetings of Skupina vtvarnch umlc (Group
of Fine Artists) in 1911 but did not officially join, returning instead to
the Mnes exhibiting society. He befriended the younger artist Jan Zrzav
in 1911 and exhibited with the latters group Sursum (Crude Ones) in 1912
in Prague.

At the height of his artistic career (1911-1915) Kubita increased his
international involvement. In 1911 he accepted an invitation from Brcke-
artist Ernst Ludwig Kirchner and became the last member to join this
Expressionist group. He participated in several international exhibitions,
including the 1912 Sonderbund exhibition in Cologne, Neue Secession
exhibitions in Berlin and Dsseldorf, and Herwarth Waldens Der Sturm
exhibitions in Berlin and Budapest. Occasionally Kubita traveled to
Germany in conjunction with exhibitions. He also wrote extensively during
these years. Alongside exhibition reviews, Kubita wrote four theoretical
treatises. These essays reveal a sophisticated awareness of Vedic
philosophy, communist ideology of Karl Marx, the philosophy of Arthur
Schopenhauer, and the artistic theories of Johann Wolfgang von Goethe,
Wassily Kandinsky, and Charles Baudelaire, among others. Kubitas essays
and correspondence indicate an acute understanding of the role of art and
art criticism in contemporary society, and suggest the radical mindset of
an intelligent artist who experienced the art world from the marginal
standpoint created by class-based and ethno-linguistic prejudice in the
Habsburg Empire. Ever-dependent on financial income from military service,
Kubita was called to war in the Balkans in 1913 and served in the Great
War after 1914. He died of Spanish influenza at a military hospital in
Prague in 1918.


Key Bibliographic Works

Bohumil Kubita. Pedpoklady Slohu. vahy, Kritiky, Polemiky [Prerequisites
of Style. Reflections, Critiques, Polemics]. Frantiek Kubita and Karel
Teige, eds (Prague: Nakladatelstv Otto Girgal, 1947). ( reprints of all
Kubitas published essays.

Bohumil Kubita. Korespondence a vahy [Correspondence and Reflections].
Frantiek eovsk and Frantiek Kubita, eds (Prague: Sttn
nakladatelstv krsn literatury, hudby, a umn, 1960). ( Kubitas
correspondence with family, artists, benefactors, patrons, mentors.

Nelehov, Mahulena. Bohumil Kubita 1884-1918 [with a catalogue raisonn
of the paintings] (Prague: Odeon, 1984, rpt. 1993).

Lama, Miroslav. Osma a Skupina (Prague: Odeon, 1988).

Lahoda, Vojtch.  esk Kubismus (Prague: Brana, 1996).

Svestka, Jiri and Tom Vlek, eds with Pavel Lika. 1909-1925. Kubismus in
Prag. Malerei, Skulptur, Kunstgewerbe, Architektur (Stuttgart: Verlag Gerd
Hatje, 1991).

Mansbach, Steven A.  Modern Art in Eastern Europe. From the Baltic to the
Balkans, ca. 1890-1939 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999).

Pomajzlov, Alena, ed. Expresionismus a esk Umn 1905-1927
[Expressionism and Czech Art]. (Prague: Nrodn Galerie, 1994).


Suggested links

National Gallery in Prague, Collection of 19th and 20th-century art
http://www.ngprague.cz/en/5/sekce/veletrzni-palace/ (significant number of
works by Kubita)

The Gallery of West Bohemia in Pilsen
http://www.zpc-galerie.cz/ (significant number of works by Kubita)

Museum of Czech Cubism, House at the Black Madonna, Prague
http://www.ngprague.cz/en/9/sekce/house-at-the-black-madonna/ (exhibits
works by Kubita and other Czech Cubists on a rotating basis)

Gordon Smith, "World War 1 at Sea: Road to War, Franco-Prussian War to
Sarajevo, 1871-1914"
http://www.naval-history.net/WW1NavalStartPolitical.htm (includes
discussion of Austro-Hungarian navy in Balkan Wars and Great War)

Topi Salon in Prague
http://www.topicuvsalon.cz/index.php?option=com_content&view=category&layout
=blog&id=50&Itemid=89 (site of 2nd Osma exhibition, 1908)

Obecn Dm (Municipal House) in Prague
http://www.obecnidum.cz/web/en/guide-to-the-municipal-house- (site of
Sursum exhibition 1912)


Suggested images

[pic] Self-Portrait (1907), etching.
http://sbirky.cmvu.cz/_cmvuURLDrivenWebPage.php?id=G_22_print&recnum=510&aut
h=Bohumil%20Kubi%C5%A1ta&tit=Self-
portrait&cpr=,%20digitized%20by%20AiP%20Beroun%20s.r.o.

[pic] Promenda u Arna [Promenade along the Arno] (1907) http://www.zpc-
galerie.cz/cs/collections This is one of his works produced in conjunction
with his studies in Florence.

[pic] Zti s vzami [Still Life with Vases] (1911) http://www.zpc-
galerie.cz/cs/collections This is one of his early Cubist works.

[pic] Vzken Lazara [Raising of Lazarus] (1911-12) http://www.zpc-
galerie.cz/cs/collections This is one of the early Cubist works that shows
his engagement with spiritual content.
