
Lewis, (Percy) Wyndham 18821957


Wyndham Lewis is best known  (in his capacity as an artist) as the leader
of Vorticism, due largely to , for his First World War paintings and for
portraits he produced during the 1920s and 1930s.  As well as editing the
Vorticist magazine, Blast, he wrote forty40 books, including the novels,
Tarr (1918) and The Apes of God (1930), both satirical depictions of the
art-worlds of Paris and London.  He wrote extensively on art and its
cultural function in such books as The Caliphs Design: Architects! Where
is your Vortex? (1919) and Time and Western Man (1927).  Until around 1922,
Lewis was considered by many to be the most advanced artist working in
Britain, acknowledged particularly by those disgruntled with Roger Fry and
Bloomsbury to be the natural leader and theorist of the avant-garde. .

Lewis attended the Slade School of Art but was expelled on account of his
disruptive behaviour; his main artistic training and intellectual formation
he attributed to a long spell (19041908)his time as a student in Paris
(predominantly) and other European cities including Munich and Madrid. He
was a member of the Camden Town Group through his friendship with Spencer
Gore, but his primitive ist and satirical drawings were not to the taste of
other members. Roger Fry and Clive Bell admired the his cubo-futurist
decorations s completed forfor the Cave of the Golden Calf nightclub,
including the three-metre square Kermesse (now lost).

[pic]

Study for Kermesse (1912) Pen and ink, watercolour and gouache (35 x
35.1) Yale Center for British Art

The painting celebrated Nietszchean Dionysianism and Bergsonian creative
energy, but Lewis also used cubist techniques to depict figures whose
energies failed them (Sunset among the Michelangelos; 1912, Victoria and
Albert Museum).

[pic]
Sunset among the Michelangelos (1912) Pen and ink, gouache (32.5 x 48).
Victoria and Albert Museum

He exhibited at the Second Post-Impressionist Exhibition (1912) and joined
Roger Frys Omega Workshop, but walked out with three other artists when he
suspected Fry of cheating him out of a commission. He headed the rival
Rebel Arts Centre and became associated with Futurism until the foundation
of Vorticism in June 1914.  Blast contained featured the Vorticist
manifesto and reproductions of the groups works. Lewiss geometrical
abstractions introduced forms that would later become familiar in the
Russian avant-garde.

[pic]
Portrait of an Englishwoman (1913) Pen and ink, pencil and watercolour. 56
x 38. The Wadsworth Atheneum, Hartford, Connecticutt (Edna Gallup Sumner
and Mary Gallup Sumner collection)


      Vorticism was disruptedovertaken by the Great War, where war, in
which Lewis served in the artillery.  He participated in the Tthird Battle
of Ypres in 1917 but shortly afterwards became an official war artist.  His
painting, A Battery Shelled, adapts the mechanomorphic vocabulary of
Vorticism to the figurative purpose required by the authorities.

[pic]

A Battery Shelled (1919). Oil on canvas (182.7 x 317.7), Imperial War
Museum


Figuration became predominant in Lewiss work after the war, though he
continued practising forms of abstraction, and always aspired to be more
than a naturalisti  in 1939 he described himself as a super-
naturalist,, distinguishing himself from the influential super-
realism (surrealism) of the time.

      In 1919, in a 1919 pamphlet highly critical of Bloomsbury formalism
and the French classical revival (The Caliphs Design: Architects! Where is
your Vortex?) Lewis called for a reshaping of the built environment using
the formal discoveries of Vorticist abstractions. He became the spokesman
for Group X, , a group of ten painters (including ex-Vorticists)
dissatisfied with Bloomsbury domination of the London Group, but after only
one exhibition the group dissolved. Disenchanted with groups, Lewis held a
one-man show, TTyros and Portraits  at the Leicester Galleries (1921).
TTyros  were satirical creations, children of a new epoch  thrown
into the post-Wwar world armed with little but the British Grin..  The
large number of drawings in the show reflected Lewiss preference for work
on paperpredilection to work on paper, and demonstrated his mastery of
thean energetic , whiplash  linear technique.  Abstractions produced in
192122 were among the most advanced in Europe, produced for a projected
exhibition in Paris that was never held.

[pic]
Figures (1921) Pencil, pen and ink, watercolour, gouache (50.4 x 35.4),
Cleveland Museum of Art, Leonard C. Hanna, Jr., Fund.

      In the 1930s Lewis returned to concentrated painting after ten 10
years devoted mainly to writing, in addition to his editing duties at
magazine  eight books and editing a magazine, The Enemy. His Leicester
Galleries 1937 Exhibition of Paintings and Drawings featured super-
naturalist  paintings treating history, social satire, invalids,  and
clinics (Lewis had undergone several major operations), as well as ) and
ghostly presences in the aAfterlife.  He began a series of portraits, the
most impressive of which were of his wife and of fellow-modernists T. S.
Eliot and Ezra Pound.

[pic]

Ezra Pound (1939). Oil on canvas (76 x 102), Tate Gallery

These works led Basil Taylor, in a Spectator obituary, to describe Lewis as
our greatest portraitist for 150 years  a more measured judgement
than Sickerts, that he waswho claimed he was the greatest portraitist of
this or any other time..
      Lewis was had been an outspokenactive writer on the side ofon the
appeasement of Hitler in the 1930s; as War broke out again in 1939 he left
for North America, where he was to spend the six difficult years.  The main
achievements of this period were a series of watercolours produced in
Toronto in 1941 on themes of bathing, the imagination, and cosmic creation.
But his sight was deteriorating as result of afrom a tumour, and this
seriously weakened compromised his abilities as an artist after his return
to England in 1945. As art critic of The Listener,  he championed Robert
Colquhoun, Francis Bacon,  and the generation of neo-Roromantics who were
coming to the fore in Britain. His 1939 book, Wyndham Lewis the Artist:
From Blast to Burlington House may be read as a sort of manifesto for them.
 In 1951 he announced his blindness.  The major retrospective, Wyndham
Lewis and Vorticism (1956, Tate Gallery) was held shortly before his death.


Bibliography
AList of Works

Lewis, Wyndham, ed. Blast nos. 1 and 2 (1914-15).  (No. 1 rpt. London:
Thames ad Hudson, 2009.)

 . The Caliphs Design: Architects! Where is your Vortex? (1919). Rpt.,
ed. Paul Edwards. Santa Barbara: Black Sparrow Press, 1986.

. Time and Western Man (1927). Rpt., ed. Paul Edwards.  Santa Rosa: Black
Sparrow Press, 1993.

. Wyndham Lewis the Artist: From Blast to Burlington House.  London:
Laidlaw and Laidlaw, 1939.

. The Demon of Progress in the Arts.  London: Methuen, 1954.

. Wyndham Lewis on Art: Collected Writings 19131956, ed. Walter Michel
and C. J. Fox. London: Thames and Hudson, 1969.

Website: Wyndham Lewiss Art Criticism in The Listener, 19461951 [ed. Jan
Cox], http://www.unirioja.es/listenerartcriticism/

B Further Reading

Edwards, Paul.  Wyndham Lewis: Art and War. London: Wyndham Lewis Memorial
Trust in association with Lund Humphries, 1992.

. Wyndham Lewis: Painter and Writer. London: Yale University Press, 2000.

, with Richard Humphreys.  Wyndham Lewis Portraits (Exhibition
catalogue.)  London: National Portrait Gallery, 2008.

Juan March Foundation, Wyndham Lewis (18821957). (Exhibition catalogue.)
Madid: Fundacin Juan March, 2010.

Klein, Jackie (ed.).  The Bone beneath the Pulp: Drawings by Wyndham Lewis.
(Exhibition catalogue.) London: Courtauld Gallery, 2004.



Mastin, Catherine, Robert Stacey and Thomas Dilworth. The Talented
Intruder: Wyndham Lewis in Canada, 19391945. (Exhibition catalogue.)
Windsor, Ontario: The Art Gallery of Windsor, 1992.

Michel, Walter.  Wyndham Lewis: Paintings and Drawings. London: Thames and
Hudson, 1971.

Normand, Tom.  Wyndham Lewis the Artist: Holding the Mirror up to Politics.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992.


