
Joan Mir (20 April 1893, Montroig  25 December 1983, Palma de Majorca)

Joan  Mir  i  Ferr  was  a  Spanish  painter,  printmaker,  sculptor   and
ceramicist. His  work  is  classified  as  Surrealist  because  it  involves
reflections  of  memory,  unconsciousness,  dreams,  and  imagination.   His
singular style is at the same time childlike, innocent and sophisticated.


Timeline of life and works

1893           1907                 1912           1918                 1919
1921
__l_____________l___________________l_____________l____________l____________
_______l_________
born   studied  at  Lonja  School              Gali  School     first   solo
exhibition   lived part-time      first solo exhibition
            of  Fine  Arts              of  Fine  Arts         in  Barcelona
in Paris        in Paris

1922                1923                     1924                       1928
1929                   1937
__l_____________l_____________l______________l________________l_____________
_______l_________
The Farm    The  Tilled  Field       joined  the       trip  to  Netherlands
  married             Paris Exhibition The Reaper
                         Surrealists                        Pilar    Juncosa
Spanish Republican Pavilion

      1940                 1941                    1967                 1974
           1983
________l_________________l__________________l_________________l____________
_________l______
     moved back        Constellation         Carnegie  Prize           major
exhibition       death caused
        to   Montroig                   series              in    Pittsburgh
Grand Palais Paris             by heart condition


Joan was the first son of Michel MirAdziras and Dolores Ferr. His father
was a goldsmith and jewelry maker in Barcelona. He first studied art at the
Lonja School of Fine Arts in  Barcelona,  in  1907.  However,  his  parents
wanted him to work as a serious businessman, therefore parallel to art,  he
took also business classes. Joan even worked as an  accountant  for  nearly
two years until he had a nervous breakdown. His  parents  finally  accepted
his choice of following the artistic career and in 1912 he started studying
at the Gali School of Art also in Barcelona.
      Between 1915 and 1918 Mir painted nudes,  portraits  and  landscapes,
mainly influenced by the colorful style of Fauvism. At this point he  began
to geometricize the forms and to  work  with  symbolic  and  metaphorical
expressions. His greatest influences in the early career were Paul  Czanne
and Vincent Van Gogh. In 1918 he had his first solo exhibition in Barcelona
and the next year he had his first  trip  to  Paris,  where  he  met  Pablo
Picasso and some members of the Dada movement.
      From 1919 on Joan spent the  winters  in  Paris  and  summers  on  his
parents farm in Montroig. In 1921, Mir had  his  first  one-man  show  in
Paris. His paintings of this period reflect some cubist influences. One  of
the best known works of this period is The  Farm.  It  is  a  view  of  his
parents farm that shows particular details and the precision  of  a  nave
primitive painter. During all his life Joan was influenced by  his  Catalan
heritage, frequently reflected in his work.
      The Tilled Field marked  a  turning  point  in  Mirs  art  toward  a
personal style. Its fanciful juxtaposition of human,  animal,  and  vegetal
forms and its array of schematized creatures  constitute  a  realm  visible
only to the minds eye, and reveal the great range of  Mirs  imagination.
This pictorial sign language would be central throughout the  rest  of  his
career. In Harlequins Carnival, there is a clear continuation of this kind
of metaphorical painting. These paintings also mark Mirs  move  toward  a
more overall composition, in which there is no use of a single focal point,
the composition is rather equally worked as an entire surface.
      In 1924 Joan joined the Surrealist  group  led  by  Andr  Breton,  he
showed his work in surrealist exhibitions and was especially influenced  by
surrealist poets, but he never accepted any surrealist doctrine. He  seemed
rather more connected to the  modern  fantastic  art  or  Magical  Realism.
Later, after a  trip  to  Netherlands  in1928,  Joan  returned  to  a  more
representational kind of painting. He painted images derived from postcards
of Dutch interiors and also some figures derived from Catalan folk art.  He
gradually simplified the forms and stripped the image down, using geometric
divisions and curving movements in his compositions.  In  1929  he  married
Pilar Juncosa and in 1931 their daughter, Dolores was born.
      After 1930s Mir  became  more  experimental,  working  with  unusual
sources, like diesel motor. He also developed some  techniques  of  collage
and sculptural assemblage and created sets and costumes for ballets.
      During  the  World  War  II   he   returned   to   Spain,   where   he
paintedConstellations, a series of  small  works  scattered  with  symbols
representing  the  cosmos.  He  also  produced  ceramics  that  were  often
intentionally misshapen and fragmented.  After  the  War  his  work  became
internationally recognized and during the 1960s he devoted  more  time  to
the mediums of printmaking, ceramics, murals and sculpture.
      Joan Mir suffered from a heart disease and he died  in  1983  in  his
home in Palma de Majorca.


References

Joan  Mir.  Encyclopaedia  Britannica.  Encyclopaedia  Britannica   Online.
Encyclopaedia              Britannica               Inc,               2011.
<www.britannica.com/EBchcked/topic/385001/Joan-Miro>

Mir, Joan. UXL Encyclopedia of  World  Biography,  2003.  Encyclopedia.com.
<www.encyclopedia.com>

Henning, E.B. A painting by Joan Mir. In: The  Bulletin  on  the  Cleveland
Museum of Art. vol.66, no.6, September 1979, pp.235-240.

Hopkins, D. Joan Mir. In:  The  Burlington  Magazine.  vol.135,  no.1088,
November 1993, pp.784-785.

Rowell, M.Joan Mir: Selected Writings and  Interviews.  London:  Thames  &
Hudson, 1987.



