
MONTAGE

SUMMARY: As an aesthetic principle, montageor the assemblage of disparate
elements into a composite whole, often by way of juxtapositionis most
often associated with the Soviet cinema of the 1920s and especially with
the theorist and filmmaker Sergei Eisenstein. This article reviews the
ideas and work of Eisenstein and Dziga Vertov, the contemporaneous
development of photo-montage in visual design, and the connections between
these movements and those in modernist painting and literature. During the
1930s, with the advent of sound cinema and the suppression of experimental
aesthetics in the Soviet Union, the practice of montage waned but was
revived by political filmmakers in the 1960s and 1970s.


MAIN ENTRY:
      Montage derives from the French verb monter, which means literally
to assemble. With the advent of film technology, montage became the term
in French to denote the process of film editing.  In aesthetics, montage
has a more conceptual meaning. Here it refers to the technique of combining
disparate images or elements to form a composite work. Montage is related
to the practice of collage; however it differs from collage most
fundamentally in the greater emphasis it places on juxtapositionoften
used to make a rhetorical point.
      The theory of montage blossomed during the 1920s when it became a
charged aesthetic concept for the Soviet avant-garde. In this historical
context, the term is most strongly associated with Russian filmmaker and
film-theorist Sergei Eisenstein. In his famous essay Montage of Cine-
Attractions (1925) and later writings, Eisenstein developed a theory of
montagein effect, a theory of filmwhere discrete units (raw footage)
lacked specific meaning in themselves, but only acquired meaning in their
controlled recombination with other units. The essence of cinema,
Eisenstein wrote, does not lie in the images, but in the relation between
the images! The filmmakers job was thus to assemble individual cinematic
shots into a composite whole, which he compared to a machine or an organism
made up of cells. Throughout his career Eisenstein enumerated several
methods of montagefrom metrical montage, based on the length of shots, to
intellectual montage based on the juxtaposition of visual symbolsbut
routinely called for synthesis through collision and conflict rather than
linkage. In this way, the principle of montage was reasoned to reflect a
Marxist understanding of history as the dialectical synthesis of opposing
forces.
      Eisensteins most famous film, Bronenosets Po'tyomkin (The Battleship
Potemkin, 1925), has become emblematic of his montage theory. Based on the
Potemkin mutiny of 1905, and commissioned twenty years later as a pro-
revolutionary testament, the film contains many canonical examples of
montage-based editing, such as the apparent awakening of a lion statue and
the Odessa steps sequence that distends time across several perspectives to
great effect. <IMAGE 1>
      Although Eisenstein was the most vocal and advanced theorist of
montage, the fundamental principle permeated Soviet cinema and arts of the
1920s. In his film workshops, Lev Kuleshov demonstrated the viewers
psychological tendency to project causality onto a sequence of unrelated
shots. Dziga Vertov, one of the first documentary filmmakers, spoke of
montage as the organization of the seen world, applying the principle not
only to the editing but also to decisions made while filming and even
during everyday perceptual observation. Vertovs most famous film, Chelovek
s kinoapparatom (Man with a Movie Camera, 1929), used superimposition and
highly rhythmic quick-cutting to simultaneously construct a representation
of urban space and represent the process of that construction. In a famous
sequence, Vertov alternates between an editor splicing film and the footage
being spliced.  <IMAGE 2>
      Contemporaneous with these developments in the cinema, a genre known
as photomontage, based on the cropping and rearrangement of still
photographs, emerged in both Moscow and Berlin. In the Soviet Union, visual
artists such as El Lissitsky and Alexander Rodchenko employed principles of
dynamic juxtaposition, overlay, and re-composition in their poster and book
designs. In Germany, the Dada and Bauhaus movements influenced a generation
of graphic artists, including Kurt Schwitters, Jan Tschichold and John
Heartfield, who pioneered the use of photomontage in everyday visual
communication. Heartfields photomontages, in particular, stand out for
their political and rhetorical ingenuity. For example, in The Meaning of
Hitlers Greeting, a magazine cover from 1932, Heartfield places a shrunk
photograph of Hitlers salute beside a larger man in a suit holding out
money, using montage to deliver a trenchant political point.
<IMAGE 3>
      The principle of montage, while achieving the zenith of its
expression in the film and photography in the 1920s, developed from
artistic currents that arose at the start of the century. Between 1907 and
1914, Picasso and Braques cubist canvasses shattered the system of fixed,
singular perspective that had dominated western art since the Renaissance.
In its wake, they developed a pictorial structure predicated on the
recombination of fragments into a dynamic amalgam of perspectives <IMAGE
4>. Meanwhile, the American filmmaker D.W. Griffith developed formal
structures for film narrative based on dramatic cross cutting,
counterpoint, and juxtaposition. His film Intolerance, first screened in
the Soviet Union in 1919 and often credited as an important precursor to
Soviet montage, combines four separate histories into a narrative
composite.
       Recent scholarship has also explored the possible interrelation
between montage in the cinema and the literary modernism of James Joyce,
Virginia Woolf, T.S. Eliot, John Dos Passos, and others. The Wandering
Rocks sequence of Ulysses, the last section of To The Lighthouse, and
Eliots The Wasteland have all been read in relation to the practice of
film editing. While some scholars have questioned these trans-disciplinary
readings, the influence of montage on Dos Passos is inarguable. A
translator of the Cubist poet Blaise Cendrars and an ardent admirer of
Eisenstein, Dos Passos employed montage techniques borrowed from the cinema
to create a panorama of American society in his U.S.A. trilogy.
      After a period of florescence in the 1920s, the montage aesthetic
waned in the 1930s. An increasingly repressive Soviet bureaucracy and the
rise of fascism in Germany ended artistic experimentation in both
countries. Contemporaneous developments in sound technology in the cinema
made narrative continuityor the perceived unity of time and spacemore
salient and seamless. (In response to these developments, Eisenstein
extended his theories to what he called vertical montage, where the image
and sound tracks operated in counterpoint rather than reinforcing one
another.)
      After World War Two, the film-critic Andr Bazin developed a theory of
film realism that valued the innate plenitude of raw footage over the
artful manipulation of that footage. While Bazins long-take, deep-focus
aesthetic is often understood in direct opposition to Eisensteins theory
of montage, many of the works praised by Bazinnotably Roberto
Rossellinis Pais (Paisan, 1946) and Orson Welless Citizen Kane
(1941)make use of the montage principle in their multi-perspectival
narrative structures as well as their framed compositionsif not in local
editing patterns. A still from Citizen Kane, for example, reveals montage
within the shot, where two separate planes of action exist in
juxtaposition.  <IMAGE 5>
      In the late 1960s, with the rise of a politicized cinema, many
critics and filmmakers rediscovered the montage principle of 1920s Soviet
film culture. Jean-Luc Godard, Chris Marker, as well as Latin American
filmmakers Fernando Solanas, Octavio Getino, Santiago Alvarez, and Toms
Gutirrez Alea all employed a modernist mode heavily influenced by a Soviet
understanding of montage. <Image 6> After the mid-1970s, however, cinematic
montage waned again. Freed from its theoretical, historical and political
roots, montage now most often denotes any film sequence whose editing
proceeds by an associative, rather than narrative, logicas in many
commercials or music videos.

Further Reading:
Andrew, D. (1976) The  Major  Film  Theories:  An  Introduction,  New  York:
Oxford University Press.
Aumont, J. (ed.) (1983) Aesthetics of Film, Austin: University of Texas
Press.
Eisenstein, S. M. (1975) The Film Sense, Orlando: Harcourt Brace.
Eisenstein, S. M. (1977) Film Form, Orlando: Harcourt Brace.
Hollis, R. (2002) Graphic Design: A Concise History, London: Thames and
Hudson.
Leyda, J. (1960) Kino: A History of the Russian and Soviet Film, New York:
Collier Books.



Joshua Sperling
Yale University

Image 1: http://unaffiliatedcritic.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/01/The-
Lions.jpg

Image 2: stills can be found here:
http://raccoonfilms.blogspot.com/2008/04/man-with-movie-camera-by-dziga-
vertov.html or this: http://sshad.files.wordpress.com/2012/10/vertov-
edit.jpg

Image 3: http://madamepickwickartblog.com/wp-
content/uploads/2010/11/weimar28.png

Image 4: http://uploads3.wikipaintings.org/images/georges-braque/violin-and-
candlestick-1910.jpg

Image 5: http://ferdyonfilms.com/Kane%203.jpg

Image 6:
http://www.rarefilmposters.com/picture?pic=1165150107&table=pictures&width=4
27&height=600

