
MONTAGE

SUMMARY: As an aesthetic principle, montageor the assemblage of disparate
elements into a composite whole, often by way of juxtapositionis most
often associated with the Soviet cinema of the 1920s and especially with
the theorist and filmmaker Sergei Eisenstein. This article reviews the
ideas and work of Eisenstein and Dziga Vertov, the contemporaneous
development of photo-montage in visual design, and the connections between
these movements and those in modernist painting and literature. During the
1930s, with the advent of sound cinema and the suppression of experimental
aesthetics in the Soviet Union, the practice of montage waned but was
revived by political filmmakers in the 1960s and 1970s.


Montage in Cinema
      Montage derives from the French verb monter, which means literally
to assemble. With the advent of film technology, montage became the term
in French to denote the process of film editing.  In aesthetics, montage
has a more conceptual meaning. Here it refers to the technique of combining
disparate images or elements to form a composite work. Montage is related
to the practice of collage; however it differs from collage most
fundamentally in the greater emphasis it places on juxtapositionoften
used to make a rhetorical point.
      The theory of montage blossomed during the 1920s when it became a
charged aesthetic concept for the Soviet avant-garde. In this historical
context, the term is most strongly associated with Russian filmmaker and
film-theorist Sergei Eisenstein. In his famous essay Montage of Cine-
Attractions (1925) and later writings, Eisenstein developed a theory of
montagein effect, a theory of filmwhere discrete units (raw footage)
lacked specific meaning in themselves, but only acquired meaning in their
controlled recombination with other units. The essence of cinema,
Eisenstein wrote, does not lie in the images, but in the relation between
the images! The filmmakers job was thus to assemble individual cinematic
shots into a composite whole, which he compared to a machine or an organism
made up of cells. Throughout his career Eisenstein enumerated several
methods of montagefrom metrical montage, based on the length of shots, to
intellectual montage based on the juxtaposition of visual symbolsbut
routinely called for synthesis through collision and conflict rather than
linkage. In this way, the principle of montage was reasoned to reflect a
Marxist understanding of history as the dialectical synthesis of opposing
forces.
      Eisensteins most famous film, Bronenosets Po'tyomkin (The Battleship
Potemkin, 1925), has become emblematic of his montage theory. Based on the
Potemkin mutiny of 1905, and commissioned twenty years later as a pro-
revolutionary testament, the film contains many canonical examples of
montage-based editing, such as the apparent awakening of a lion statue and
the Odessa steps sequence that distends time across several perspectives to
great effect. <IMAGE 1>
      Although Eisenstein was the most vocal and advanced theorist of
montage, the fundamental principle permeated Soviet cinema and arts of the
1920s. In his film workshops, Lev Kuleshov demonstrated the viewers
psychological tendency to project causality onto a sequence of unrelated
shots. Dziga Vertov, one of the first documentary filmmakers, spoke of
montage as the organization of the seen world, applying the principle not
only to the editing but also to decisions made while filming and even
during everyday perceptual observation. Vertovs most famous film, Chelovek
s kinoapparatom (Man with a Movie Camera, 1929), used superimposition and
highly rhythmic quick-cutting to simultaneously construct a representation
of urban space and represent the process of that construction. In a famous
sequence, Vertov alternates between an editor splicing film and the footage
being spliced.  <IMAGE 2>
      Contemporaneous with these developments in the cinema, a genre known
as photomontage, based on the cropping and rearrangement of still
photographs, emerged in both Moscow and Berlin. In the Soviet Union, visual
artists such as El Lissitsky and Alexander Rodchenko employed principles of
dynamic juxtaposition, overlay, and re-composition in their poster and book
designs. In Germany, the Dada and Bauhaus movements influenced a generation
of graphic artists, including Kurt Schwitters, Jan Tschichold and John
Heartfield, who pioneered the use of photomontage in everyday visual
communication. Heartfields photomontages, in particular, stand out for
their political and rhetorical ingenuity. For example, in The Meaning of
Hitlers Greeting, a magazine cover from 1932, Heartfield places a shrunk
photograph of Hitlers salute beside a larger man in a suit holding out
money, using montage to deliver a trenchant political point.
<IMAGE 3>
      The principle of montage, while achieving the zenith of its
expression in the film and photography in the 1920s, developed from
artistic currents that arose at the start of the century. Between 1907 and
1914, Picasso and Braques cubist canvasses shattered the system of fixed,
singular perspective that had dominated western art since the Renaissance.
In its wake, they developed a pictorial structure predicated on the
recombination of fragments into a dynamic amalgam of perspectives <IMAGE
4>. Meanwhile, the American filmmaker D.W. Griffith developed formal
structures for film narrative based on dramatic cross cutting,
counterpoint, and juxtaposition. His film Intolerance, first screened in
the Soviet Union in 1919 and often credited as an important precursor to
Soviet montage, combines four separate histories into a narrative
composite.
       Recent scholarship has also explored the possible interrelation
between montage in the cinema and the literary modernism of James Joyce,
Virginia Woolf, T.S. Eliot, John Dos Passos, and others. The Wandering
Rocks sequence of Ulysses, the last section of To The Lighthouse, and
Eliots The Wasteland have all been read in relation to the practice of
film editing. While some scholars have questioned these trans-disciplinary
readings, the influence of montage on Dos Passos is inarguable. A
translator of the Cubist poet Blaise Cendrars and an ardent admirer of
Eisenstein, Dos Passos employed montage techniques borrowed from the cinema
to create a panorama of American society in his U.S.A. trilogy.
      After a period of florescence in the 1920s, the montage aesthetic
waned in the 1930s. An increasingly repressive Soviet bureaucracy and the
rise of fascism in Germany ended artistic experimentation in both
countries. Contemporaneous developments in sound technology in the cinema
made narrative continuityor the perceived unity of time and spacemore
salient and seamless. (In response to these developments, Eisenstein
extended his theories to what he called vertical montage, where the image
and sound tracks operated in counterpoint rather than reinforcing one
another.)
      After World War Two, the film-critic Andr Bazin developed a theory of
film realism that valued the innate plenitude of raw footage over the
artful manipulation of that footage. While Bazins long-take, deep-focus
aesthetic is often understood in direct opposition to Eisensteins theory
of montage, many of the works praised by Bazinnotably Roberto
Rossellinis Pais (Paisan, 1946) and Orson Welless Citizen Kane
(1941)make use of the montage principle in their multi-perspectival
narrative structures as well as their framed compositionsif not in local
editing patterns. A still from Citizen Kane, for example, reveals montage
within the shot, where two separate planes of action exist in
juxtaposition.  <IMAGE 5>
      In the late 1960s, with the rise of a politicized cinema, many
critics and filmmakers rediscovered the montage principle of 1920s Soviet
film culture. Jean-Luc Godard, Chris Marker, as well as Latin American
filmmakers Fernando Solanas, Octavio Getino, Santiago Alvarez, and Toms
Gutirrez Alea all employed a modernist mode heavily influenced by a Soviet
understanding of montage. <Image 6> After the mid-1970s, however, cinematic
montage waned again. Freed from its theoretical, historical and political
roots, montage now most often denotes any film sequence whose editing
proceeds by an associative, rather than narrative, logicas in many
commercials or music videos.

Joshua Sperling
Yale University

Montage in Literature

As a literary device practiced in avantgarde movements such as Cubism,
Futurism, Dadaism, and Surrealism, montage refers to the conjoining of
heterogeneous discourses in a given text. Within the frame of the literary
artwork, montage provokes unmediated clashes between genres and styles,
often featuring non-narrative fragments from various sources such as
newspaper clippings, slogans (commercial, political, religious), or popular
songs. Literary montage, moreover, favors disembodied discourses that are
linked to the impact of modernity: the languages on which it draws are
those of bureaucratization, commercialization, and serialization, among
others. Juxtaposed to more character driven narrative strands, these
discursive montage elements question the agency of the modern subject.
Montage literature also tends to playfully dissect language itself,
breaking down traditional syntax and semantics in the process. It favors
ambiguity, irony, and paradox over narrative unity or totality.

While montage theories in silent cinema took inspirations from literature,
modernist literary montage derives from the visual montages of Futurism and
Dadaism. From these artistic movements, montage literature adopts formal
liberties such as syntactic contractions and breaks, or visualizations via
an emphasis on typography and the exhibition of words as images and sound.
Furthermore, it stresses intermediality by experimenting with discourses of
modern communication technologies: newspaper, radio, film, agit-prop, and
advertisement. Montage literature is decisively multilingual, orchestrating
literary and vernacular voices and fostering clashes among sociolects,
dialects, citations from popular culture, and the playful appropriation of
non-native languages.

The historical trajectory of such literary experiments encompasses modern
poetry from T.S. Eliots The Waste Land with its citations and multilingual
insertions to Gertrude Steins experimental prose, the deliberate
contractions and visual form of Futurist poetry by Filippo Marinetti, and
Dadaist collage and sound poetry.

Another group of avant-garde word artists indebted to montage favored the
cut-up technique first promulgated by Tristan Tzara in 1920. In How to
make a Dadaist Poem Tzara describes the transformation of a newspaper
article into a poem as guided by chance and the unconscious. Other
Dadaists, including collage artist Hans Arp, followed the technique as
well. Brion Gysin revived cut-up poetry in the 1950s and inspired Beat poet
William S. Burroughs to pursue this method in his own writings. Since 2005,
Nobel laureate Herta Mller has created collage poems out of cut up words
from various print media. Like earlier literary montages, her work explores
the space between image and text.

Montage is also a central device in the modernist city novels attempt to
capture the multilayered life-worlds of the twentieth century metropolis in
Europe and the US. The cities in Dos Passoss Manhattan Transfer (1925),
Louis Aragons Le Paysan de Paris (1926), and Berlin Alexanderplatz (1929)
by Alfred Dblin emerge out of a cacophony of focalized voices and
anonymous, disembodied discourses. The authors borrow from contemporary
news media to break up their storylines with unrelated documents of public
life. While fiction and documentation seem to clash, the authors also tend
to draw the specific temporality of the document into their at times
dreamlike and mythologizing narratives. The city novels montages thereby
undermine the strict differentiation between the two realms, fiction and
document, and open an epistemological space for language and ideology
critique.

Contributor Name

Photomontage

Photomontage includes a wide variety of practices, based on the assemblage
of primarily photographic material. Photomontage can be made from
photographs and photo fragments cut with a blade from an existing source
and pasted onto a support; from composite images of negatives fused in the
darkroom; from excised and reassembled photographs that have been re-
photographed to produce a seamless surface; by using the crop, cut, and
paste function in a computer program and reassembling a new photographic
image. Text, colour, drawing, painting, or object fragments can also be
incorporated. The inter-war period represented the apex of photomontage,
when the medium was widely used as a persuasive medium, from publicity to
propaganda, particularly by artists affiliated to Constructivism, Dada,
Surrealism and the Bauhaus.  In its dynamic reassembly of image and text,
photomontage offered a visually stimulating picture with claims to
documentation because of the photographs purported status as a document of
the real. Photomontage both questioned and profited from this documentary
standing. Based on mass-replicated images, photomontage could easily be
reproduced, utilized for commercial and political posters, book jackets,
book and journal illustrations, magazine covers and page layouts,
advertisements, photomurals, exhibition catalogues, industrial-product
brochures, department-store pamphlets, film advertising, and exhibition
installation.

Organized around the structural principle of pictorial disruption and re-
assembly, photomontage is considered a symbolic form or paradigm of the
modern. Its optical fragmentation and simultaneous competition of pictorial
fragments conjured the accelerated social, economic, and technological
transformations of the twentieth century. Photomontage also imitated modern
industrial production in its assembly of pre-fabricated, mass-replicable
parts. In Germany, where photomontage was widely used, the connection of
montage to industrial assembly line production is linguistically explicit,
for montieren means to assemble or to fit while a Monteur is a mechanic
or engineer. Photomontage was thus linked with mass reproduction and modern
manufacture rather than the institution of high art, symbolized by the
unrepeatable act of painting.

Berlin Dada is often credited with the invention of photomontage, the
honour split between two competing factions: Hannah Hch and Raoul Hausmann
on the one hand and George Grosz and John Heartfield on the other. On
summer holiday in the Baltic Sea, Hch and Hausmann discovered in their
rented fishermans cottage a colour lithograph of military personnel onto
which had been pasted the head of the fishermans son, evidently a soldier.
These prints turned into photomontage were common in German homes before
and during World War I, transforming stock, mass-produced military images
into private mementos. Heartfield and Grosz too located their discovery of
photomontage in wartime habits, namely the practice of sending postcards
from the front onto which photograph clippings had been pasted that
suggested in images what would have been censored in words. Though these
recollections vary with the narrator, the discovery of photomontage by the
avant-garde derived from a popular practice that reclaimed mass media
images for individual use. Photomontage was widely used to galvanize
popular opinion through modern, mass-reproducible means.

Sabine Kriebel

Further Reading:
Dawn Ades, Photomontage, (London: Thames and Hudson, 1976).
Andrew, D. (1976) The Major Film Theories: An Introduction, New York:
Oxford University Press.
Aragon, Louis (1965) Collages dans le roman et dans le film, in Les
Collages, Paris: ditions Hermann, 107-129.
Aumont, J. (ed.) (1983) Aesthetics of Film, Austin: University of Texas
Press.
Boris Burroughs, William and Brion Gysin (1978) The Third Mind, New York:
Viking Press.
Special issue Dada and Photomontage across Borders, New German Critique
36 (2/107), Summer 2009, pp. 53-88

Brigid Doherty, See? We are all Neurasthenics! Or, the Trauma of Dada
Montage,Critical Inquiry, Autumn 1997, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 82-132.
Eisenstein, S. M. (1975) The Film Sense, Orlando: Harcourt Brace.
Eisenstein, S. M. (1977) Film Form, Orlando: Harcourt Brace.
Hiepe, Richard, Die Fotomontage:  Geschichte und Wesen einer
Kunstform,exhibition catalogue, (Stadt und Kunstverein Ingolstadt, 1969).
Hollis, R. (2002) Graphic Design: A Concise History, London: Thames and
Hudson.
Annegret Jrgens-Kirchhoff, Technik und Tendenz der Montage (Lahn-Giessen:
Anabas Verlag, 1978
Leyda, J. (1960) Kino: A History of the Russian and Soviet Film, New York:
Collier Books.
Mbius, Hanno (2000) Montage und Collage. Literatur, bildende Knste, Film,
Fotografie, Musik, Theater bis 1933, Munich: Fink.
Perloff, Marjorie (1998) Collage and Poetry, in Encyclopedia of
Aesthetics, ed. Michael Kelly, New York: Oxford University Press. Vol. 1,
pp. 384-387.
Teitelbaum, Matthew, ed., Montage and Modern Life, (MIT Press, 1992).
Zmegac, Viktor (1994) Montage/Collage, Moderne Literatur in
Grundbegriffen, ed. Dieter Borchmeyer, Viktor Zmegac, Tbingen: Max
Niemeyer, 286-291.





Image 1: http://unaffiliatedcritic.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/01/The-
Lions.jpg

Image 2: stills can be found here:
http://raccoonfilms.blogspot.com/2008/04/man-with-movie-camera-by-dziga-
vertov.html or this: http://sshad.files.wordpress.com/2012/10/vertov-
edit.jpg

Image 3: http://madamepickwickartblog.com/wp-
content/uploads/2010/11/weimar28.png

Image 4: http://uploads3.wikipaintings.org/images/georges-braque/violin-and-
candlestick-1910.jpg

Image 5: http://ferdyonfilms.com/Kane%203.jpg

Image 6:
http://www.rarefilmposters.com/picture?pic=1165150107&table=pictures&width=4
27&height=600

Image:

Alfred Dblin, Berlin Alexanderplatz, handwritten manuscript (unpaginated),
page with glued in newspaper article from the Seventh Book. Deutsches
Literaturarchiv Marbach/ German Literary Archive Marbach.

[pic]
