
Bibiana Obler

Mnter, Gabriele (18771962)

Gabriele Mnter was a key figure in German Expressionism. Born in Berlin,
she moved to Munich in 1901 where she became an active participant in the
Neue Knstlervereinigung Mnchen (NKVM) (Munich New Artists Association),
founded in 1909, and then the Blue Rider, in 1911. Known primarily for her
painting, she was also a prolific graphic artist and photographer. Like
many women of her generation, she received her art education through a
combination of private lessons, women's art schools, and new co-educational
institutions, in her case, the Phalanx School, where she studied with
Wassily Kandinsky. The latter encounter proved momentous for both artists:
by 1903, they were engaged (secretly at first) and remained in a
relationship until 1916. During these years, both Mnter and Kandinsky
developed their mature styles. Expressionism in southern Germany, unlike
Die Brcke in the north, fostered a collegial environment comprising both
women and men. Mnter's painting changed dramatically in 1908 during a
vacation the couple took in Murnau with Marianne von Werefkin and Alexej
Jawlensky. Mnter attributed her shift towards Fauvism to Jawlensky's
interest in Matisse and the Nabis, to the Bavarian landscape, and to the
inspiration of Hinterglasmalerei (reverse-glass painting).

Like most of her colleagues in German Expressionism, with the exception of
Kandinsky, Mnter focused on figuration rather than abstraction. These
artists shared a keen concern for the relationship between artist, viewer,
and artwork. For Mnter, painting was a way to explore barriers between
self and other. In still lifes, landscapes, portraits, and genre scenes,
she attended to what sometimes appears insuperable distance between
discrete entities but also suggested, on occasion, the possibility of a
kind of togetherness. Her Still Life with Queen, for example, portrays a
scraggly bouquet that both blocks and frames our access to the eponymous
queen, whose dimensions in relation to the flowers suggest her identity as
a doll even as Mnter allows an element of uncertainty: is this a portrait
of an actual queen on a dais in the far background? An apparition? Or,
indeed, as those familiar with Mnter's home might suspect, a gift from the
dancer Alexander Sacharoff? The painting unsettles assumptions about clear
distinctions between person and object, reality and fantasy, and even
masculinity and femininity (if we factor in Sacharoff's proclivity for
cross-dressing).

Mnter acquired an international reputation through solo and group
exhibitions in France, Germany, Japan, Russia, and so on. She lived for an
extended period in Sweden and Denmark during World War I and maintained her
international profile and involvement with Expressionism during the Weimar
Republic, participating in exhibitions of the November Group (1921) and of
the Blue Rider (USA, 1926). She continued to exhibit through the first
years of the Third Reich: encouraged by her companion Johannes Eichner,
whom she had met in 1927, she concentrated on subjects that appealed to the
regime and participated in the 1936 traveling "Adolf Hitler's Streets in
Art." During World War II, however, she kept a low profile. Public acclaim
returned after the war with a retrospective at the Stdtische Galerie im
Lenbachhaus (1949) and representation at the 25th Venice Biennale (1950)
and the first documenta in Kassel (1955).

References and further reading

Behr, Shulamith and Annegret Hoberg. Gabriele Mnter: The Search for
      Expression 1906-1917. London: Courtauld, 2005.

Heller, Reinhold. Gabriele Mnter: The Years of Expressionism 1903-1920.
      Munich: Prestel, 1997.

Hoberg, Annegret. Wassily Kandinsky and Gabriele Mnter: Letters and
      Reminiscences 1902-1914. Ian Robson, trans. Munich: Prestel, 1994.

Hoberg, Annegret and Helmut Friedel, eds. Gabriele Mnter 1877-1962
      Retrospektive. Munich: Prestel, 1992.

Obler, Bibiana. Intimate Collaborations: Kandinsky and Mnter, Arp and
      Taeuber. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2014.



[pic]

Image: Gabriele Mnter, Still Life with Queen, 1912. Oil on canvas, 27 7/16
 19 5/16 in. (69.8 x 49 cm). Arthur Jerome Eddy Memorial Collection,
1931.521, The Art Institute of Chicago.

http://www.artic.edu/aic/collections/artwork/9018?search_no=2&index=0


