
Pereira dos Santos, Nelson

Peter Baker (Texas A & M University)

Nelson Pereira dos Santos (1928, So Paulo) is a Brazilian actor,
screenwriter, film critic and theorist, producer, and director. He can be
considered the initiator of modern Brazilian cinema. His first feature,
Rio: 40 Graus (Rio 100 Degrees Farenheit, 1955), jump-started the cinema
nvo (New Cinema) movement that would dominate Brazilian vanguard cinema
throughout the 60s and early 70s. Throughout his more than 50 years of
filmmaking, Pereira dos Santos has continued to shape the Brazilian screen.
Como era gostoso o meu francs (How Tasty Was My Little Frenchman, 1971) is
his most internationally known film; a departure from his earlier neo-
realist style, it started a more self-critical phase that reflects on the
instability of all ideologies and registers the disappointment with the
Left in Brasil following the onset of the military dictatorship in 1964.
The late 70s films attempted to create what he called a popular cinema,
rejected theoretical treatment, and sought to convey the views of ordinary
citizens. He has continued to be an influential filmmaker in the so-called
New Brazilian Cinema of the 90s and today, with political films such as
Brasilia 18% (2006). The majority of his films are based on literary
adaptations from Brazilian authors and since 2006 he belongs to the
Brazilian Academy of Lettersthe first filmmaker to be nominated.

References and Further Reading

Johnson, Randal. (1984)Nelson Pereira dos Santos: Toward a Popular
Cinema. Cinema Novo X 5: Masters of Contemporary Brazilian Film. Austin,
Tex: University of Texas Press. 162 - 216. (A good and accessible
introduction to Nelson Pereira dos Santoss work which, despite the title,
is not only limited his role in the cinema nvo movement).

Sadlier, Darlene J. (2003) Nelson Pereira dos Santos. Chicago; University
of Illinois Press. (A recent biography of the directors life seen through
his films and critical writings. A great introduction with chapters broken
down according to the phases of filmmaking).

List of Works (Abbreviated).

Juventude (documentary short, 1949) (English subtitles not available)

Rio 40 Graus (Rio 100 Degrees F., 1955)

Rio Zona Norte (1957) (English subtitles not available)

Mandacaru Vermelho (1961) (English subtitles not available)

Boca de Ouro (Golden Mouth, 1963) (English subtitles not available)

Vidas Secas (Barren Lives, 1963)

El justicero (1967) (English subtitles not available)

Fome do Amor (Hunger for Love, 1968) (English subtitles not available)

Azyllo Muito Loco (1970) (English subtitles not available)

Como Era Gostoso o Meu Francs (How Tasty Was My Little Frenchman, 1971)

Quem  Beta? (1972) (English subtitles not available)

O Amuleto de Ogum (1974) (English subtitles not available)

Tenda dos Malagres (1977) (English subtitles not available)

Insnia (1980) (English subtitles not available)

A Missa do Galo (short, 1982) (English subtitles not available)

Na Estada da Vida (The Highway of Life, 1983) (English subtitles not
available)

Memrias do Ccere (Memories of Prison, 1984)

Jubiab (1986) (English subtitles not available)

A Terceira Margem do Rio (1994) (English subtitles not available)

Cinema de Lgrimas (Cinema of Tears, 1995)

Guerra e Liberdade  Castro Alves em SoPaolo (1998)

Razes dos Brazil: Uma cinebiografia de Srgio Buarque de Holanda
(documentary, 2003)

Meu Compadre, Z Ketti (documentary short, 2003)

Brasilia 18% (2006)

A Msica Segundo Tom Jobim (The Music According to Antonio Carlos Jobim,
2012) (English subtitles not available)

A Luz do Tom (2013) (English subtitles not available)

