
Thanom Chapakdee                                         (529 words)

Pratuang Emjaroen (1935)

Pratuang Emjaroen is aone member of a wave of self-taught artists in
Thailand who gained renown in the 1970s. His works are driven by his
concerns aboutregarding the vicissitudes of life, social problems, nature
and Buddhism. Having never been stagnant or motionless in his production of
works, A prolific artist, hhe has created a large number and variety works
throughout his career. Pratuang began his artistic career working as a
painter of cinema billboards and movie posters. Inspired by the biographic
film Lust forof Life (1956), about Vincent Van Gogh, Pratuang developed an
interest in becoming a visual artist and began studying painting
independently. Being a self-taught artist could have been an obstacle to
his career in challenging Thailands traditional art institutions.
Fortunately, Pratuang was able to overcome this in developing his own
inimitable style in painting, drawing and poetry. Having struggled to
become a renowned artist, Pratuang established the Dhamma Group in 1971,
and was able to convince many artists to join, thereby increasing his own
reputation. In 1967, he a won Silver Medal from the National Exhibition of
Arts, and in 1968, 1974 and 1995 won Bronze Medals. Pratuang received the
National Artist of Thailand Award in Visual Art in 2005.

Pratuang was born in Thonburi and grew up in an area of abundant fruit
framing and rice fields. This landscape became deeply embedded in his
character and indelibly etched in his memory and subconscious. When he was
16 he worked with his brother in a local cinema painting cinema billboards
and posters for 8 years, before he leftquit and to become an committed to
be an artist. His early paintings (1960-1970) concentrated on the essence
of life and nature, for example, such as The Black Sun (1963),, Life (1966)
and , The Family (1966). During the 1970s, the Thailands political crisis
and social problems encouraged him to create works that included  where he
used religious symbolism and used, the rural, and political references to
criticisze the political climate, for instance Dharma and Adharma (1973-
1974), Grains, Sickle, and Lamp of Clay (1976), The Seni Stone (1976), Red
Morning-Glory and Rotten Gun (1976), Sacrifice (Fasting Buddha) (1976),
Madman Loves his Country (1976).



[pic]

Pratuang Emjaroen, Dharma and Adharma, 1973-1974, Oil on canvas, 200x500
cm.

From 1981-2000s, Pratuangs work focused on the characteristics of
experience and emphasised abstract forms of nature, while also including
human figures,  of people as in The Agriculture King (1987), Poet Chang
(1989), and Dances of the Emerald (2000).  Pratuang He is an outstanding
artist with establishing a confident artistic style, incorporating nature,
religion, modes of life and philosophical ideas. He lives and works at
Emjaroen Gallery in Kanchanaburi Province.



Reference and further reading.

-----. (1984) Dhamma Vision, (exhibition catalogue), Visual Dhamma Gallery,
Bangkok, United Production.

Clark, John. (1998) Modern Asian Art, Honolulu: University of Hawaii
Press.

Emjaroen, Pratuang; Sinsakul, Tasanee; and Viravong, Sumalie , (1990).
Pratuang Emjaroen : His Life and Artistic Work, 1962-1990. Bangkok: Saha
International.



Jataisong, Chookiet. (2001). Sen See Hang Cheevit : Pratuang Emjaroen
(Lines Colors of Life : Pratuang Emjaroen), Bangkok: Ming Mitr.



Poshyananda, Apinan. (1992) Modern Art in Thailand: Nineteenth and
Twentieth Centuries. New York: Oxford University Press.







