

S-Carneiro, Mrio de (1890-1916)
Mrio de S-Carneiro is one of the major exponents of Portuguese  modernism.
Although his literary production is limited to just a few years,  from  1913
to April 1916. His  earlier  writings,  even  when  they  maintain  thematic
affinities with his later texts, are alien  to  the  peculiar  S-Carneirian
interpretation of modernism. S Carneiros works  in  verse  and  prose  are
among the most significant of the period and, more generally, of  Portuguese
literature of the twentieth century. For this point of view, two events  are
fundamental for  the  S-Carneiros  modernist  poetics:  his  meeting  with
Fernando Pessoa in Lisbon probably during the  first  months  of  1912  (S-
Carneiro gives a copy of Princpio to  Fernando  Pessoa  with  a  dedication
dated 29 August 1912) and his departure to Paris    the  city  where,  from
October 1912, the poet will spend three long periods and where he  will  end
up taking his own life on 26 April 1916.


Timeline of Life

1890        1892            1912                  1914             1916

Born        Mother dies           Meets Fernando        First economic
death by
                            Pessoa                      hardship
                      suicide
                            Moves to Paris



Timeline of Works

1912        1913            1915                  1937             1958-
1959

Amizade     Disperso       Cu em Fogo                 Indcios de
           Cartas a
Princpio   A Confisso de        Manucure                         Oiro
            Fernando

            Lcio
Pessoa



Mrio de S-Carneiro was born on 19 May 1890 in Lisbon, to a wealthy  family
with a strong military tradition. In 1892 he lost  his  mother  and  he  was
entrusted into the care of a governess. Even  though  in  his  writings  S-
Carneiro never explicitly mentions this family tragedy, in a  letter  of  11
December 1931 to the critic Joo Gaspar Simes,  Fernando  Pessoa  considers
the condition of orphan as being  fundamental  to  understand  S-Carneiros
poetry. He studied at the Liceo do  Carmo,  without  achieving  particularly
brilliant results. It is  here  that  he  meets  Toms  Cabreira  Junior,  a
classmate who committed suicide in the school playground on 9  January  1911
and with whom he wrote the play Amizade, presented  on  stage  on  23  March
1912. In the autumn of 1911 S-Carneiro finished high  school  and  went  to
Coimbra where he was admitted to the  Faculty  of  Law.  After  just  a  few
months, however, he returned to Lisbon, agreeing  to  take  up  his  studies
once again only on the understanding that his father would allow him  to  go
to Paris. Before leaving Portugal, he  published  his  collection  of  short
stories, Princpio, and  met  Fernando  Pessoa.  Pessoa  was  at  that  time
literary critic of A guia,  and  would  ultimately  help  S-Carneiro  to
publish, between  1913  and  1914,  three  short  stories  in  the  literary
mouthpiece for the Portuguese Renaissance movement. During  his  first  stay
in Paris (October 1912  June 1913), S-Carneiro neglected his  studies  and
remained relatively alien to the artistic environment of the city. The  many
letters sent to his friends, in particular  to  Fernando  Pessoa,  show  the
writer distant from the epicentres of the artistic avant-garde,  staying  in
touch with only a few Portuguese artists (above all with the painter  Santa-
Rita Pintor who will introduce him to Cubism).

The first semester of 1913, however, coincides with a phase of  considerable
creativity. Still thanks to S-Carneiros correspondence, we see  the  birth
of the twelve  poems  in  this  period  that  will  make  up  the  Disperso
collection, published in November  1913  simultaneously  with  the  novel  A
Confisso de Lcio (Lcios Confession), written in Lisbon in  September  of
the same year. At this time S-Carneiro  appears  to  have  been  profoundly
influenced by the  stylistic  rules  that  Fernando  Pessoa  sent  him  from
Lisbon. Nevertheless, the influence of symbolist poetics in these  works  is
also evident along with the recourse to a still decadent imaginary  (themes,
symbols and strongly connoted myths). The modernist rift lies  in  the  deep
renewal  of  poetic  language,  which  provokes,  even  in  texts  that  are
impeccable from a formal  point  of  view,  a  brusque  flaring  up  of  the
symbolist  inheritance  and  the  appearance  of  a  new  art,  which   will
facilitate Mrio de S-Carneiros entry into the avant-garde.

During his second stay in Paris (from June to September  1914),  S-Carneiro
continued to write poetry  later  included  in  the  posthumous  collection
Indcios de Oiro (1937)  and short stories published in the volume  Cu  em
Fogo (The Great Shadow) in April 1915. In both the works of this period  and
the correspondence with Fernando Pessoa, we see an increasing    but  never
definitive  distancing from symbolism and an approach  to  the  avant-garde
(Futurism,  but  also  Pessoan   poetics:   Paulism,   Intersectionism   and
Sensationism).  From  the  summer  of  1914  economic   problems   made   it
increasingly difficult for his father to maintain S-Carneiro in Paris.  The
outbreak of the First World War then forced the poet to  return  to  Lisbon.
During  his  months  in  the  Portuguese  capital,  S-Carneiro  played   an
important role in  the  publication  of  two  issues  of  Orpheu,  the  most
significant magazine of  Portuguese  modernism.  In  July  1915  S-Carneiro
returned  to  Paris.  His   increasingly   difficult   economic   conditions
exacerbated  a  personal  tragedy  that,  in  the  first  months  of   1916,
transformed into a crescendo of loneliness and despair. On 2 April  1916  he
sent Pessoa a notebook containing the poems that will make  up  Indcios  de
Oiro (1937), authorising him to use his work as he thinks fit. On  26  April
of the same year  having arranged to meet a compatriot he met in Paris,  so
that he could witness his death,  he took his own life in  his  hotel  room
by swallowing five bottles of strychnine.

References and further reading
Martins, F. Cabral (1997), O Modernismo em  Mrio  de  S-Carneiro,  Lisbon:
Editorial Estampa.
Colquio/Letras (1990), 117-118, Mrio de S-Carneiro  a  cem  anos  do  seu
nascimento, Lisbon.
Mouro-Ferreira, D. (1983), caro e Ddalo: Mrio de S-Carneiro e  Fernando
Pessoa, in Hospital das Letras, Lisbon: IN-CM: 131-138.
Rocha, C. (1984), O Essencial sobre Mrio de S-Carneiro, Lisbon: IN-CM.
Woll, D. (1968), Realidade e Idealidade na Lrica  de  S-Carneiro,  Lisbon:
Delfos.

List of Works:

Poetry
Disperso (1913)
Manucure (1915)
Indcios de Oiro (1916; Ist edn 1937)

Novels
A Confisso de Lcio (1913) [Lcios Confession (1993), Sawtry: Dedalus]

Short Story Collections
Princpio (1912)
Cu em Fogo (1915) [The Great Shadow (1996), Sawtry: Dedalus]

Drama
Amizade (1912)

Letters
Cartas a Fernando Pessoa (1958-1959)



                                                          Giorgio de Marchis
