
Thanom Chapakdee



Santi Isrowuthakul (1945-)

Santi Isrowuthakul is an artist and activist who participated in the
Artist Front of Thailand (AFT.)(1974-1976). Born in Bangkok, Santi
graduated with a masters degree in Fine art in 1975 from the Art Institute
of Chicago, USA. While studying in Chicago he participated in several
exhibitions and workshops, in which he created public mural paintings and
mixed- media works. When he returned to Thailand in 1975, he used arts and
cultural activities to encourage the student-led peoples movement, taking
part in group exhibitions including The Bangkok Dice Group (1976) and, The
Tao Group (1976). For his works, Hhe used simple materials including toilet
paper, newspapers, wood and, marble to produce collages, and site-specific
works aimed at provoking the viewer. Santis work reflects a radical
ideology, which developed as a result of the countrys communist
insurgency, the development of political consciousness among artists and a
growing interest in Socialist Realism, giving birth to works that
satiriszed politicians, culture and society. In 1976, Santi was elected
chairman of the AFT, and co-organisized an art exhibition around the
Pramane ground (Sanam Luang) area to support the student-led movement
against American military bases in Thailand during the Vietnam War. The
AFT, under Santis leadership, created several politically motivated
cultural and arts activities beforeuntil the coup dtat on October 6,
1976.  He lives and works as a freelance in Bangkok

References and further reading.

Leesuwan, Wiboon. (2005) Art in Thailand : From Siam to Modern art (Thai).
Bangkok, LadPraw Book Center.

Poshyananda, Apinan. (1992) Modern Art in Thailand : Nineteenth and
Twentieth Centuries. New York : Oxford University Press.



