
Bibiana Obler

Taeuber, Sophie (18891943)

Sophie Taeubers career spanned a variety of movements and media, including
Dada and Constructivism; textile arts, interior design, architecture,
painting, and sculpture. Although based in Switzerland for most of her
life, she was born a German citizen, became Swiss around 1905, and French
in 1926. She received a progressive education at Wilhelm von Debschitz's
Teaching and Experimental Studios for Applied and Fine Arts, Munich
(191014), with a break in 191213 to study at the School of Applied Arts,
Hamburg. From 191629 Taeuber was a professor at the Zurich School of
Applied Arts, teaching textile design and weaving. Her turned-wood puppets
and set designs for the play King Stag (1918), commissioned for the Zurich
Marionette Theater, garnered critical acclaim. In addition to establishing
a reputation as an innovative applied artist, Taeuber participated in Dada
from its inception in 1916, partly as a result of her friendship with Hans
Arp, whom she met in 1915, and also through her belonging to Rudolf von
Laban's dance troupe, which performed at various Dada events. After World
War I, Taeuber increasingly turned to interior architecture and fine art,
leaving the applied arts almost entirely behind once she moved to Paris in
the late 1920s.

Taeuber, although not deemed a founding Dadaist by Dada's founders, was an
active participant, contributing her choreography, her signature on the
Dada Manifesto of 1918, and one of her turned-wood sculptural heads to the
Dada journal Der Zeltweg (1919). During these years, she and Arp
collaborated on abstract vertical-horizontal compositions in collage and
embroidery; although impossible to date with certainty, these
compositionsand Taeubers own abstract paintings and textileswere among
the earliest purely abstract works produced by European avant-gardes.

In the 1920s, Taeuber developed an international reputation and worked
increasingly as a designer. Her tapestries were featured in exhibitions
across Europe and, in 1925, at the International Exhibition of Modern
Tapestries, Toledo, USA. She completed various architectural and interior
design projects, including a redesign of the Aubette, an entertainment
complex in Strasbourg, which she invited Arp and Theo van Doesburg to join
her in executing (192628). The couple could now afford a house in Clamart,
near Paris, which was built and furnished according to Taeuber's plans
(192728).

In the 1930s, in Paris, Taeuber shifted her energies towards the fine arts,
creating carefully balanced compositions of lines and geometric forms in
gouache, oil, relief, and collage. She joined the short-lived group Cercle
et Carr (193031) and then Abstraction-Cration, leaving that group in
1934 in disagreement with its dogmatic rejection of all figuration. From
193739 Taeuber edited Plastique, a trilingual journal concerned with
Concrete Art. She continued to have strong ties with Switzerland, joining
the Swiss artists' group Allianz in 1937. She worked closely with her
husband on assorted projects, such as the Conjugal Sculpture (1937) and her
drawings for his poetry collection Shells and Umbrellas (1938).

Taeuber and Arp escaped Paris before the Germans arrived in 1939, seeking
refuge in the south of France. In Grasse, they collaborated with Alberto
Magnelli and Sonia Delaunay on a suite of lithographs. They returned to
Switzerland in 1942 where Taeuber died in January 1943 of carbon monoxide
poisoning from a coal-burning stove.

References and further reading

Aargauer Kunsthaus. Sophie Taeuber-Arp 1889-1943. Aarau, 2010.

Arp-Taeuber, S. H. and Blanche Gauchat. Anleitung zum Unterricht im
      Zeichnen fr textile Berufe. Zurich: Verlag Schul- und
      Bureaumaterialverwaltung der Stadt Zrich (Gewerbeschule der Stadt
      Zrich), 1927.

Kuthy, Sandor. Sophie TaeuberHans Arp. KnstlerpaareKnstlerfruende.
      Kunstmuseum Bern, 1988.

Muse d'art moderne de la ville de Paris and Muse cantonal des beaux-arts
      de Lausanne. Sophie Taeuber. Paris, Lausanne, 1989.

Obler, Bibiana. Intimate Collaborations: Kandinsky and Mnter, Arp and
      Taeuber. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2014.

Schmidt, Georg, ed. Sophie Taeuber-Arp. Basel: Holbein, 1948.

Taeuber-Arp, Sophie. "Bemerkungen ber den Unterricht im ornamentalen
      Entwerfen." Korrespondenzblatt des Schweiz. Verins der Gewerbe- und
      Hauswirtschaftslehrerinnen. 14: 11/12 (December 31, 1922): 156-159.

[pic]

Image: Sophie Taeuber-Arp, Composition of Circles and Semicircles, 1935,
gouache on paper. 10 x 13  in. National Museum of Women in the Arts,
Washington, DC. Gift of Wallace and Wilhelmina Holladay;  2012 Artists
Rights Society (ARS), New York / VISCOPY, Australia

http://www.nmwa.org/works/composition-circles-and-semicircles

