
Clare Davies

                                                                   681 words

The Egyptian School of Fine Arts
The Egyptian School of Fine Arts (Madrassat al-Funun al-Jamila al-Misriyya)
opened its doors on May 13, 1908, a date cited by many art historians as
marking the starting point of modern art in Egypt. The ESFA aimed to
cultivate Egyptian artists while modelling its curriculum on that of the
French academy system, with rigorous training in drawing at its core. At
the same time, the School claimed to produce graduates capable of turning
their skills to professional advantage. A privately funded institution, it
was highly influential in molding so-called first- and second-generation
artists. The model of arts education adopted by the school and its
relevance to the goal of realising an Egyptian artistic renaissance were
themes addressed in early debates following the schoools establishment. An
inaugural exhibition of student work took place between January 13 and 20,
1910 at the Royal Automobile Club in downtown Cairo. Many early graduates
would go on to constitute Egypts celebrated Pioneer Generation (Jil al-
Ruwwad) in the arts.  The re-invention of the school as a state-run
institution in the late 1920s played an important role in contemporary
struggles between competing factions for control of the arts.

Located in a palace owned by its founder and patron Prince Youssouf Kamal
in Cairos Darb al-Gamamiz neighborhood, the school was open to male
Egyptians and foreign residents without regard to religion. It catered
primarily to Egypts so-called efendiya class and boasted 109 full-time
students by January 1911.

The schools original faculty and staff included Guillaume Laplagne
(Director and Professor of Sculpture); Paulo Forcella (Drawing and
Painting); James-Albert Coulon (Design); Henri Piron (Architecture);
Mikail Farag (Math); and Mohamed Effendi Zohdi (Arabic Calligraphy).
Laplagne (1908-1918) was succeeded in his position as director by Gabriel
Biessy (1918-1927) and Camillo Innocenti (1928-1937). The artist Mohamed
Naghi was the first Egyptian to head the school (1937-1939).

Until the late 1920s, the ESFA appears to have relied almost exclusively on
the generosity of its founder to supply its budget. An early attempt to
assimilate it to the Egyptian University failed and the school was later
assigned to the oversight of the Ministry of Education. The school
relocated twice in the 1920s, and was finally shuttered as part of a wide-
reaching plan to reorganize arts institutions and consolidate their
direction under the state. The Higher School of Fine Arts (Madrassat al-
Funnun al-Jamila al-'Uliya or lcole Superieur des Beaux Arts) took its
place in 1928 and a new generation of artists were introduced as teachers.
After relocating twice more, the school moved a final time in September
1935 to a villa at 8, Sh. Ismail Muhammad in Zamalik, where it remains
today. The school was renamed the Royal Academy for the Fine Arts (al-
Kulliya al-Malikiyya li-l-Funnun al-Jamila) in 1951 and the Academy of Fine
Arts (Kulliyat al-Funun al-Jamila) following the Free Officers coup of
1952. After being assigned to the Ministry of Higher Education in 1961,
administrative oversight of the school was passed to Helwan University in
October 1975.

References and Further Reading

al-Mallakh, Kamal, Rushdi Iskandar and Subhi al-Sharuni. Kulliyat al-Funun
al-Jamila, 41-58.     In Thamanun Sanna min al-Fann [Eighty Years of Art].
Cairo: al-Haya al-Misriyya  al-Amma li-l-Kitab, 1991.

Ayyad, Raghab. Ahadith fi-l-Funun al-Jamila fi Nisf Qarn, 1908-1958 [Half
a Century of     Events in the Fine Arts]. Cairo, 1959.

Azar, Aim. La Peinture Moderne en gypte. Cairo: Les ditions Nouvelles,
1961.
Naf, Silvia.  la Recherche dune Modernit Arabe: LEvolution des Arts
Plastiques en Egypte,  au Liban et en Irak [In Search of an Arab Modernity:
The Evolution of the Plastic Arts in    Egypt, Lebanon and Iraq]. Geneva:
Editions Slatkine, 1996.

File 0069-004463 (Abdin), Dar al-Wathaiq al-Qawmiyya [National Archives],
Cairo, Egypt     (February 11-March 6, 1911).

File 0069-004464 (Abdin), Dar al-Wathaiq al-Qawmiyya [National Archives],
Cairo, Egypt     (February 28-May 7, 1911).

Laplagne, Guillaume. Des Aptitudes Artistiques des gyptiens dAprs les
Resultats Obtenus  
      lcole des Beaux-Arts, Lgypte Contemporaine 1, no. 3 (May 1910):
432-440.


