
LEE Ufan (1936 - )

Lee Ufan was a painter, sculptor, writer and philosopher born in 1936 in
Kyosangnamdo, South Korea. He moved to Japan during his studies at the
College of Fine Arts at the Seoul National University in 1956, and later
received a degree in Philosophy from Nihon University in 1961. Lee Ufan
came to prominence as one of the precursors of the Mono-ha (School of
Things) movement in the late 1960s. The Mono-ha school of thought rejected
Western notions of representation and focused instead on the nature of
materials and their interrelations. The Mono-ha movement was one of Japans
first avant-garde movements to be recognized internationally. Lee Ufan was
also a pioneering member of the Tansaekhwa (monochrome painting) school in
Korea. His works often show the interaction between the rawness of
materials through the confines of minimal interventions and restraint in
object manipulation.  Lee Ufan was awarded the UNESCO prize at the Shanghai
Biennale in 2000. He currently divides his time between Kamakura, Japan and
Paris, France.


References and further reading

Doi, M., Mochizuki, M. and Sasaki H. ed. (2010) Tokyo Gallery+BTAP 1950 -
2010, Tokyo: Tokyo Gallery+BTAP. (A 60th anniversary catalogue of Tokyo
Gallery+BTAP, one of the main galleries in Tokyo that were most involved
with the Monoha movement, both during its peak period and until now as the
movements continuing legacy).

Kim, Yong-na. (2005) 20th Century Korean Art, London: Laurence King
Publishing. (A comprehensive text that provides information on Lee Ufan and
Monohas influence and relationship with other major art movement in Korea
during the time).

Rawlings, A. and Tazen W. (ed.) (2007) What is Mono-ha? Tokyo: Tokyo
Gallery+BTAP. (A catalogue of the What is Mono-ha? exhibition with
comprehensive essays that shed light on Lee Ufans role in the Mono-ha
movement).


