
Weaver, Harriet Shaw (1876-1961)

Born into a wealthy family with roots in the cotton industry, Harriet Shaw
Weaver turned first to social work. An interest in womens suffrage led to
her involvement with the New Freewoman and, from 1911, she devoted her
inherited wealth to sponsoring the arts, gradually becoming a major patron
and publisher of modernism. In 1913 she became the business manager of the
New Freewoman, taking over from DORA MARSDEN as editor when it became the
Egoist. Her financial support was crucial to the success of this literary
periodical, which published almost every significant name in modernism,
including T.S. ELIOT, EZRA POUND, JAMES JOYCE, WYNDHAM LEWIS and MARIANNE
MOORE, but only sold 200 copies between 1916 and 1919.

In 1916 she established the Egoist Press to publish JOYCEs A Portrait of
the Artist as a Young Man (previously serialised in The Egoist) and went on
to publish several other major works, including ELIOTs first collection of
poetry, Prufrock and Other Observations (1917). Starting in 1914, Weaver
gradually became JOYCEs patron and principle source of income. It has been
estimated that she gave him the modern equivalent of 1.5 million euros
during his lifetime. Although this patronage was initially anonymous, their
subsequent personal correspondence offers many insights into JOYCEs work
on ULYSSES and FINNEGANS WAKE. Her papers are now held at the British
Library, including JOYCEs letters and notes.

Further reading

J. Lidderdale and M. Nicholson, Dear Miss Weaver (1970)
Peter Brooker and Andrew Thacker (eds.) The Oxford Critical and Cultural
History of Modernist Magazines (2010)

Matthew Creasy, University of Glasgow

