
The Yiddish Avant-Garde

The Yiddish avant-garde represented a second generation of inventors of a
new, independent Jewish culture. The first generation, which had been
involved in the haskalah (enlightenment) movement, promoted Zionism, the
revival of Hebrew as a literary language and, partly, its assimilation
within everyday culture. In contrast, the second generation aimed at the
emancipation of a secular culture of the Diaspora with Yiddish as a prime
token of its identity. Yiddish was recognized as the second language of
Jewish culture on par with Hebrew at the Czernowitz Language Conference of
1908.

The movement was particularly active in the former Ansiedlungsrayon of
the Russian Empire (Poland, Ukraine, and Belarus), but also had ties to
Romania and other countries. The main centres of the network were Kiev,
St.Petersburg, Minsk, Kharkov, Riga, Odessa, Moscow, d, and Warsaw, but
also New York, Berlin, and Paris. Its most prominent representatives were
Nathan Altman, Boris Aronson, Marc Chagall, Mark Epshteyn, Dovid Hofstheyn,
Isaachar Ber Ryback, Sarah Shor, Alexander Tyschler, and Mikhail Yo/Yoffe.

In the first phase of the existence of the Yiddish avant-garde, An-Sky
[Shloyme Zanvl Rappoport], author of the famous play The Dybbuk or Between
Two Worlds, initiated the ethnographic expeditions into Ansiedlungsrayon
along the Dniepr in 1911 and 191516. They were documented with photographs
and drawings by El Lissitzky and Ryback and resulted in Jewish folkloristic
and oriental motives in the designs of poetry and children books. After the
October Revolution, the Yiddish avant-garde briefly flourished, supported
by official organisations such as the Kultur-Lige (Cultural League),
founded in Kiev in 1918, which had branches in Biaystok, Odessa, and
Vilna. In 1920, when several Jewish artists emigrated from the Soviet
Union, they founded another branch independent from the Russian communist
party structures in Warsaw.

The main formations of the Yiddish avant-garde were the Kiever Grupe (Kiev
Group, 191820), which split into the Moscow group with the Shtrom magazine
(Current, 192224), the Berlin group with the periodical Milgroim/Ribbom
(Garnet, 192224, published in Hebrew concurrently) and the New York group
Inzikh (Within Oneself, 192039). The publication of the magazine Yung-
Yidish (1919) marks the first stage of the Warsaw Yiddish avant-garde,
culminating in the almanac Khalyastre (The Gang, 1919-22, edited by Peretz
Markish) and the activities of the group of the same name (191924). The
second phase of the movement included the magazine Ringen (Rings, 192122,
edited by Melekh Ravitch), and the final one was marked by the activities
of the great threeMarkish, Ravitch, and Uri Tsvi Greenberg. The latter
also edited their own magazineAlbatros (192223, first Warsaw, then
Berlin). Warsaw acquired the status of the European centre of Yiddish
literature, with Paris and Berlin serving as its satellites. The literature
of the Diaspora expressed the atrocities of World War I, the pogroms and
revolutions. The magazines Ing-Yidish and Albatros broke the biblical ban
on images and served the avant-gardes integration of visual and literary
media with a new kind of typography, which was unprecedented in other
publications of the movement.

The Young Yiddish group (1919-23), which included Jankiel/Yankl Adler,
Moyshe Broderzon, Marek Szwarc, and several female artists (among them Pola
Lindenfeld) created a developed institutional network consisting not only
of a magazine but also of a series of illustrated books and periodicals
such as Heftn far Literatur un Kunst (Books for Literature and the Arts,
1919) and SFeld (Field, 6 issues, 1919-23), exhibitions in d, Warsaw,
and Biaystok, musical events, and theatre performances.

The tradition of artistic Yiddish theatres and cabarets originates in the
performances by Graham Goldfaden in Jassy, Romania, in 1876, including folk
songs and the Purim-shpiel of Biblical motifs, which gained popularity, but
were disregarded among intellectuals who called it shrund (garbage) and
were forbidden by the Tsar in 1878-1905. Important later theatres included
The Vilnius Group (1916-17), the Warszawer Idiszer Kunsttheater (192224,
192627, 193839), the experimental Jung Theatre (193237), and the Folks
und Jungt Theater (1937-39). In d, Broderzon, his wife Miriam, Yekheskl
Moyshe Nayman/Neuman, Yitskhok/Vincent Brauner, and Henryk Kohn founded the
puppet theatre Chad Gadje (Billy-Goat, 1922-32) and the revolutionary caf-
thtre Ararat (1927-39), which survived until the outbreak of World War
II.

The Yiddish avant-garde was far from homogeneous and reflected the far-
reaching discussions on so-called Jewish art. On the one hand, the Paris-
based magazine Makhmadim (Precious Ones, 1911-12, edited by Marek Szwarc,
Josif Chaikov, and Isaac Lichtenstein) promoted the imitation of the
synagogue and oriental ornamentation, while on the other, the most eminent
representatives of the so-called Jewish expressionismNathan Altman, Marc
Chagall, Ludwig Meidner, and Jacob Steinhardtabandoned copying folklore
patterns for the sake of stylisation and individual traits following cubist
deformation and orphism. However, the Yiddish avant-garde also adapted
other styles and cooperated with several avant-garde groups in Russia,
Poland, Romania, Germany, and France (see also POLISH EXPRESSIONISM, POLISH
CONSTRUCTIVISM, HENRYK BERLEWI, TERESA ARNOWER).

After the 1922 congress and exhibition of Dadaists and Constructivists in
Dsseldorf and the 1923 exhibition of Young Art in d, international
constructivists of Jewish origin were only rarely identified with Yiddish
culture. The main tendencies of INTERNATIONAL CONSTRUCTIVISM with its non-
personal, rational visual language were Mechano-Facture by Henryk Berlewi
and the Prouns by El Lissitzky. The last major platforms of Yiddishism with
roots in avant-garde culture were the groups Yung-Vilne (Young Vilna,
192939) and the New York based Inzikh group (until 1939). In the 1930s
they changed from avant-garde tendencies to a concentration on social
issues, but continued to publish Yiddish poetry.

References and further reading:

Ruth Apter-Gabriel, Tradition and  revolution.  The  Jewish  Renaissance  in
Russian Avant-Garde Art 1912-1928, Jerusalem: Muzeon Yisrael, 1987.

Marina Dmitrieva (ed) et al., Jdische Kulturen im Neuen Europa. Wilna 1918-
1939, Wiesbaden: Harassowitz, 2004.

Rachel Ertel (ed.), Khaliastra, la bande.  Revue  littraire  Varsovie  1922
Paris 1924, Paris: Lachenal et Ritter, 1989.

Benjamin Harshaw (ed.), The Moscow Yiddish Theater.  Art  on  Stage  in  the
Time of Revolution, New Heaven: Yale University Press, 2008.

Nathalie Hazan-Brunet/Ada Ackerman (eds), Futur antrieur: L'avant-garde  et
le livre yiddish (19141939), Paris: Flammarion, 2009.

Lidia Guchowska, From Transfer to Transgression. The Yiddish Avant-Garde  
a Network within the Universal Network of the International  Movement  or  a
Complementary One? Cahiers de la Nouvelle Europe, Sept. 2012 (forthcoming).

Hillel Kazowsky, The Artists of the Kultur-Lige, Jerusalem: Gesharim, 2003.

Hillel Kazowsky, (ed.), Kultur-Lige. Artistic Avant-Garde of the  1910s  and
1920s. Kiev: Duch i Litera, 2007.

Jerzy Malinowski, The  Yung  Yiddish  (Young  Yiddish)  Group  and  Jewish
Modern Art in Poland, 19181923, Polin 6 (1991), pp. 223230

Gilles Rozier, Moyshe Broderzon:  Un  crivain  yiddish  davant-garde,  St.
Denis, Fr., 1999).

Yung-yidish, in: http://www.yivoencyclopedia.org/article.aspx/Yung-yidish


Suggested images:


   1. Issachar Ber Rybback, Village scene, Oil on  Cardboard,  1918,  Ryback
      Museum - Bat Yam
   http://www.comite-
   ryback.org/Catalogue_Raisonne_Details.php?id=catalogueRaisonne






   2. Jankiel Adler, My Parents, Oil on Wood, c. 1921, Museum of Art, d
   http://www.eilatgordinlevitan.com/krakow/krkw_pix/art/070108_31_b.gif&ir=h
   ttp://www.eilatgordinlevitan.com/krakow/krkw_pages/krkw_art.html&ig=http:/
   /t1.gstatic.com/images?q=tbn:ANd9GcShXbs4Hhny23ued9TXh6Fy2ccCQOVZddkqDSaCf
   M1h2s_0y6o2u601mk0&h=600&w=245&q=Jankiel+Adler+Moi+Rodzice&babsrc=TB_ss


      3. Henryk Berlewi, Cover of the almanac  Albatros  34,  Berlin  1923,
      lithography, Maison de la culture yiddish Bibliothque Medem, Paris.

      http://jewschool.com/wp-
      content/uploads/2008/02/300_image014.jpg&ir=http://jewschool.com/2008/0
      2/24/13165/i-got-this-new-philosophy-zayde-its-called-mechano-
      faktura/&ig=http://t3.gstatic.com/images?q=tbn:ANd9GcSTHXo9D_3V4f152hvJ
      KPJhlHxP9h4eEIr6lVhxzDfE9yIZxIH0ZlZ86CVV&h=476&w=300&q=henryk+berlewi&b
      absrc=TB_ss
