
Teresa arnower [arnowerwna] (1895 Warsaw  1950 New York)
was a Polish painter, graphic artist, sculptor, stage and architectureand
stage/architectural designer. One of the most prominent representatives of
POLISH CONSTRUCTIVISM, arnower was also linked to the YIDDISH AVANT-GARDE
and belonged to the pioneers of functional typography and photomontage. As
co-founder and the main representative of the Polish group Blok, she edited
the groups magazine Blok (1924-26). Together with her closest
collaborator, Mieczysaw Szczuka, she made this publication a forum of
INTERNATIONAL CONSTRUCTIVISM, promoting machine aesthetics and a
utilitarian approach toof art.

Career
Beginning in 1915, arnower studied sculpture at the School of Fine Arts in
Warsaw; in 1919 she was awarded the prize for the best student of the year.
She also received a prize by the Ministry of Art and Culture for her
diploma work Masculine Nude (1920). arnower held her first exhibition in
the Spring Salon of the Society for Fine Arts Promotion in 1921, and co-
organised the Exhibition of New Art in Vilnius in 1923,  as well as Blok
group showsthe group shows of Blok in Warsaw in 1924 and in 1924-2525. She
exhibited her works in the Berlin gallery Der Sturm (1923), at the
International Exhibition of Modern Art in Bucharest (1926), at the first
International Modern Architecture Exhibition in Warsaw (1926), and at the
Modern Architecture Exhibition in Moscow (1927).

In her theoretical statement in the 1923 Vilnius catalogue, arnower called
for simplicity and utilitarian qualities of thefor new art. According to
her,In her view, artists had to replace pure aesthetics, and anticipate the
development of synthetic cinema-theatre-likecinematic shows, containing
elements of painting, sculpture, architecture, poetry, music, film, and
dance. She was most likely also co-author of the manifesto What is
constructivism? in Blok (nos. 6-7).

At the beginning of the 1920s, arnower experimented with a style of
abstract sculpture inspired e.g. by ALEXANDR RODCHENKO, and in the mid-
1920s she began to use photomontage for political purposes, such as, e.g.
in left-wing posters. A well-known book designer, she prepared e.g. the
layout for the publications by Ilya Erenburg and Vladimir Mayakovsky (1929)
and cooperated worked with Yiddish editing houses , designing e.g. the
cover of Arbeter lueth (1926). In magazines such as Kunia (The Forge,
1927), Miesicznik Literacki (Literary Monthly, 1929), and Czerwony
Sztandar (The Red Banner, 1931), she developed the clear and strict style
of her typographical compositions , consisting of parallel and right-angled
crossing lines.

After the death of Szczuka in 1927, she took over publication of the revue
Dwignia (The Lever) and devoted its 5th 5th issue to his  memory. Another
homage to him was the edition of theShe also honoured him in the bilingual
book Europa, which featured with typography by Szczuka and text by Anatol
Stern (1929). This book , which was awarded a prize at the 1931
Iinternational Eexhibition of Mmodern Bbooks in Paris. While arnowers
dynamic photomontage for the cover of this publication delivers a grotesque
analysis of the world at the end of the 1920s, her photomontage for the
cover of the book Obrona Warszawy (The Defence of Warsaw, 1942), following
the same compositiondone in the same compositional style, depicts the
catastrophe of the war.

In 1937, arnower emigrated to Paris, and during World War II she relocated
to Spain, Portugal, Canada and finally to New York, where she worked on a
monumental sculpture devoted to the Warsaw Ghetto uprising. In the 1940s
she turned to painting for economic reasons, and until her suicide in 1950
she created some semi-figurative watercolours.

Legacy
Most art works by arnower are known only from reproductions in books and
journals, mainly from illustrations in Blok. The foreword to the catalogue
of her last exhibition at Peggy Guggenheims Art of This Century Gallery in
1946 was written by Barnett NewmanBarnett Newman wrote the foreword to the
catalogue of her last exhibition, at Peggy Guggenheims Art of This Century
Gallery in 1946.

References and further readings:

Barnett Newman, Selected Writings and Interviews, ed. by John P. ONeill,
New York: Knopf, 1990.

Constructivism in Poland, 1923-1936: Blok, Praesens, a.r., Lodz: Museum of
Art, Essen: Folkwang Museum, Otterlo: Rijksmuseum Krller-Mller, 1973.

Hilary Gresty, Jeremy Lewison (eds), Constructivism in Poland 1923 to 1926,
Cambridge: Kettles Yard Gallery; London: Riverside Studios; Oxford: Museum
of Modern Art 1984.

Natasza Styrna, Teresa arnower 18951950,
http://jwa.org/encyclopedia/article/zarnower-teresa

The 70th Anniversary of the New Art Exhibition, Vilnius 1923, d: Museum
of Art, 1993, n.p.

Suggested images:

1. Teresa arnowerwna, cover for the book Europa with texts by Anatol
Stern and design by Wadyslaw Szczuka, Warsaw 1931, photomontage 1929,
http://www.google.pl/imgres?q=Teresa+Zarnower&hl=de&sa=X&biw=1366&bih=6
36&tbm=isch&prmd=imvnsb&tbnid=26eslyCMMF1m4M:&imgrefurl=http://www.themerson
archive.com/book8.htm&docid=AEj98qeDWm8BVM&imgurl=http://www.themersonarchiv
e.com/largepics/gaba8.jpg&w=564&h=600&ei=g3MJUK_7FaGa1AXk3vy0Cg&zoom=1


      2. Teresa arnowerwna, Obrona Warszawy. Lud polski w obronie stolicy
      (wrzesie 1939 roku) [The Defense of Warsaw. Polish people in defense
      of the capital (September 1939)], New York: Polish Labor Group, 1942,
      Museum of Modern Art, Warsaw
      http://www.google.pl/imgres?q=Teresa+%C5%BBarnower&hl=de&sa=G&biw=1366&
      bih=636&tbm=isch&tbnid=m6U605kegGO5CM:&imgrefurl=http://www.artmuseum.p
      l/kolekcja.php%3Fl%3D0%26id%3DZarnowerowna_obrona&docid=bkfpQuWjTfguXM&
      imgurl=http://www.artmuseum.pl/kolekcja/700px/96.jpg&w=503&h=700&ei=Ym4
      JUM2lOcKT0QXn6dGuCg&zoom=1


3. Teresa arnowerwna, cover design Arbeter Luekh, Warsaw 1926, Muse
dart et histoire du judasme, Paris
      http://www.google.pl/imgres?q=Teresa+Zarnower&hl=de&sa=X&biw=1366&bih=6
      36&tbm=isch&prmd=imvnsb&tbnid=Hs4HtnjmQi8isM:&imgrefurl=http://www.e-
      flux.com/announcements/sanja-ivekovic-and-pole-jew-artist-identity-and-
      avant-garde/&docid=BA2EXMsrc7E5yM&imgurl=http://www.e-flux.com/wp-
      content/uploads/2010/11/wpid-
      1255466902image_web.jpg&w=257&h=350&ei=q3QJUIiPDIXS0QXX1tzTCg&zoom=1
